SOURCE: Brown Girl Dreaming - by Jacqueline Woodson
----- ----- ----- ------ ---
ALSO BY JACQUELINE WOODSON
Last Summer with Maizon
The Dear One
Maizon at Blue Hill
Between Madison and Palmetto
I Hadn't Meant to Tell You This
From the Notebooks of Melanin Sun
The House You Pass on the Way
If You Come Softly
Lena
Miracle's Boys
Hush
Locomotion
Behind You
Feathers
After Tupac and D Foster
Peace, Locomotion
Beneath a Meth Moon

NANCY PAULSEN BOOKS
Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Group (USA) LLC
375 Hudson Street, New York, NY 10014
USA | Canada | UK | Ireland | Australia New Zealand | India | South Africa | China penguin.com
A Penguin Random House Company
Copyright © 2014 by Jacqueline Woodson.
Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices, promotes free speech,
and creates a vibrant culture. Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this book and for complying
with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or distributing any part of it in any form without
permission. You are supporting writers and allowing Penguin to continue to publish books for every reader.
“Dreams," and “Poem [2]" from THE COLLECTED POEMS OF LANGSTON HUGHES by Langston Hughes, edited by Arnold
Rampersad with David Roessel, Associate Editor, copyright © 1994 by the Estate of Langston Hughes.
Used by permission of Alfred A. Knopf, an imprint of the Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, a division
of Random House LLC. All rights reserved. Used by permission of Harold Ober Associates Incorporated.
“Twistin' the Night Away" written by Sam Cooke. Published by ABKCO Music, Inc. Used by permission.
All rights reserved.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available upon request.
ISBN 978-0-69819570-7
Version_1
This book is for my family- past, present and future.
With love.
CONTENTS
family tree
PART I
i am born
PART II
the stories of south carolina run like rivers
PART III
followed the sky's mirrored constellation to freedom
PART IV
deep in my heart, i do believe
PART V
ready to change the world
author's note
thankfuls
family photos


Hold fast to dreams
For if dreams die
Life is a broken-winged bird
That cannot fly.
Hold fast to dreams
For when dreams go
Life is a barren field
Frozen with snow.
-Langston Hughes

february 12, 1963
I am born on a Tuesday at University Hospital Columbus, Ohio,
USA-
a country caught between Black and White.
I am born not long from the time or far from the place where
my great-great-grandparents worked the deep rich land unfree
dawn till dusk
unpaid
drank cool water from scooped-out gourds looked up and followed the sky's
mirrored constellation to freedom.
I am born as the South explodes, too many people too many years enslaved, then
emancipated but not free, the people who look like me keep fighting
and marching
and getting killed so that today- February 12, 1963
and every day from this moment on, brown children like me can grow up free.
Can grow up learning and voting and walking and riding wherever we want.
I am born in Ohio but the stories of South Carolina already run like rivers
through my veins.
second daughter's second day on earth
My birth certificate says: Female Negro Mother: Mary Anne Irby, 22, Negro
Father: Jack Austin Woodson, 25, Negro
In Birmingham, Alabama, Martin Luther King Jr.
is planning a march on Washington, where John F. Kennedy is president.
In Harlem, Malcolm X is standing on a soapbox
talking about a revolution.
Outside the window of University Hospital,
snow is slowly falling. So much already
covers this vast Ohio ground.
In Montgomery, only seven years have passed
since Rosa Parks refused to give up
her seat on a city bus.
I am born brown-skinned, black-haired
and wide-eyed.
I am born Negro here and Colored there
and somewhere else,
the Freedom Singers have linked arms, their protests rising into song: Deep in
my heart, I do believe
that we shall overcome someday.
and somewhere else, James Baldwin is writing about injustice, each novel, each
essay, changing the world.
I do not yet know who I'll be
what I'll say
how I'll say it .....
Not even three years have passed since a brown girl named Ruby Bridges
walked into an all-white school.
Armed guards surrounded her while hundreds of white people spat and called
her names.
She was six years old.
I do not know if I'll be strong like Ruby.
I do not know what the world will look like
when I am finally able to walk, speak, write . . .
Another Buckeye!
the nurse says to my mother.
Already, I am being named for this place.
Ohio. The Buckeye State.
My fingers curl into fists, automatically
This is the way, my mother said,
of every baby's hand.
I do not know if these hands will become
Malcolm's-raised and fisted
or Martin's-open and asking
or James's-curled around a pen.
I do not know if these hands will be
Rosa's
or Ruby's
gently gloved
and fiercely folded
calmly in a lap,
on a desk,
around a book,
ready
to change the world . . .
a girl named jack
Good enough name for me, my father said the day I was born.
Don't see why
she can't have it, too.
But the women said no.
My mother first.
Then each aunt, pulling my pink blanket back patting the crop of thick curls
tugging at my new toes
touching my cheeks.
We won't have a girl named Jack, my mother said.
And my father's sisters whispered, A boy named Jack was bad enough.
But only so my mother could hear.
Name a girl Jack, my father said, and she can't help but
grow up strong.
Raise her right, my father said, and she'll make that name her own.
Name a girl Jack
and people will look at her twice, my father said.
For no good reason but to ask if her parents
were crazy, my mother said.
And back and forth it went until I was Jackie and my father left the hospital
mad.
My mother said to my aunts, Hand me that pen, wrote Jacqueline where it asked
for a name.
Jacqueline, just in case
someone thought to drop the ie.
Jacqueline, just in case
I grew up and wanted something a little bit longer and further away from
Jack.
the woodsons of ohio
My father's family
can trace their history back to Thomas Woodson of Chillicothe, said to be the
first son
of Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings some say
this isn't so but .....
the Woodsons of Ohio know what the Woodsons coming before them left
behind, in Bibles, in stories, in history coming down through time so
ask any Woodson why
you can't go down the Woodson line without
finding
doctors and lawyers and teachers athletes and scholars and people in government
they'll say,
We had a head start.
They'll say,
Thomas Woodson expected the best of us.
They'll lean back, lace their fingers across their chests,
smile a smile that's older than time, say, Well it all started back before Thomas
Jefferson
Woodson of Chillicothe . . .
and they'll begin to tell our long, long story.
the ghosts of the nelsonville house
The Woodsons are one
of the few Black families in this town, their house is big and white and sits on a
hill.
Look up
to see them
through the high windows inside a kitchen filled with the light of a watery
Nelsonville sun. In the parlor a fireplace burns warmth into the long Ohio
winter.
Keep looking and it's spring again, the light's gold now, and dancing across the
pine floors.
Once, there were so many children here running through this house up and down
the stairs, hiding under beds and in trunks,
sneaking into the kitchen for tiny pieces of icebox cake, cold fried chicken, thick
slices of their mother's honey ham . . .
Once, my father was a baby here and then he was a boy . . .
But that was a long time ago.
In the photos my grandfather is taller than everybody and my grandmother just
an inch smaller.
On the walls their children run through fields,
play in pools, dance in teen-filled rooms, all of them grown up and gone now
- but wait!
Look closely:
There's Aunt Alicia, the baby girl, curls spiraling over her shoulders, her hands
cupped around a bouquet of flowers. Only four years old in that picture, and
already, a reader.
Beside Alicia another picture, my father, Jack, the oldest boy.
Eight years old and mad about something or is it someone
we cannot see?
In another picture, my uncle Woody, baby boy
laughing and pointing
the Nelsonville house behind him and maybe his brother at the end of his pointed
finger.
My aunt Anne in her nurse's uniform, my aunt Ada in her university sweater
Buckeye to the bone . . .
The children of Hope and Grace.
Look closely. There I am in the furrow of Jack's brow, in the slyness of Alicia's
smile, in the bend of Grace's hand . . .
There I am . . .
Beginning.
it'll be scary sometimes
My great-great-grandfather on my father's side was born free in Ohio,
1832.
Built his home and farmed his land, then dug for coal when the farming wasn't
enough. Fought hard in the war. His name in stone now on the Civil War
Memorial: William J. Woodson
United States Colored Troops,
Union, Company B 5th Regt.
A long time dead but living still among the other soldiers
on that monument in Washington, D.C.
His son was sent to Nelsonville lived with an aunt
William Woodson
the only brown boy in an all-white school.
You'll face this in your life someday,
my mother will tell us
over and over again.
A moment when you walk into a room and
no one there is like you.
It'll be scary sometimes. But think of William Woodson
and you'll be all right.
football dreams
No one was faster
than my father on the football field.
No one could keep him from crossing the line. Then touching down again.
Coaches were watching the way he moved, his easy stride, his long arms
reaching up, snatching the ball from its soft pocket of air.
My father dreamed football dreams, and woke to a scholarship at Ohio State
University.
Grown now
living the big-city life in Columbus
just sixty miles
from Nelsonville
and from there
Interstate 70 could get you on your way west to Chicago Interstate 77 could take
you south but my father said
no colored Buckeye in his right mind would ever want to go there.
From Columbus, my father said, you could go just about
anywhere.
other people's memory
You were born in the morning, Grandma Georgiana said.
I remember the sound of the birds. Mean
old blue jays squawking. They like to fight, you know.
Don't mess with blue jays!
I hear they can kill a cat if they get mad enough.
And then the phone was ringing.
Through all that static and squawking, I heard
your mama telling me you'd come.
Another girl, I stood there thinking,
so close to the first one.
Just like your mama and Caroline. Not even
a year between them and so close, you could hardly tell
where one ended and the other started.
And that's how I know you came in the morning.
That's how I remember.
You came in the late afternoon, my mother said.
Two days after I turned twenty-two.
Your father was at work.
Took a rush hour bus
trying
to get to you. But
by the time he arrived,
you were already here.
He missed the moment, my mother said, but what else is new.
You're the one that was born near night,
my father says.
When I saw you, I said, She's the unlucky one
come out looking just like her daddy.
He laughs. Right off the bat, I told your mama,
We're gonna call this one after me.
My time of birth wasn't listed
on the certificate, then got lost again amid other people's bad memory.
no returns
When my mother comes home
from the hospital with me,
my older brother takes one look
inside the pink blanket, says,
Take her back. We already have one of those.
Already three years old and still doesn't understand
how something so tiny and new
can't be returned.
how to listen #1
Somewhere in my brain
each laugh, tear and lullaby
becomes memory.
uncle odell
Six months before my big sister is born, my uncle Odell is hit by a car
while home in South Carolina
on leave from the Navy.
When the phone rang in the Nelsonville house, maybe my mother was out
hanging laundry on the line or down in the kitchen speaking softly with her
mother-in-law, Grace, missing her own mama back home.
Maybe the car was packed and ready for the drive back to Columbus-the place
my father called the Big City-now their home.
But every Saturday morning, they drove the hour to Nelsonville and stayed till
Sunday night.
Maybe right before the phone rang, tomorrow was just another day.
But when the news of my uncle's dying traveled from the place he fell in South
Carolina, to the cold March morning in Ohio, my mother looked out into a
gray day that would change her forever.
Your brother
my mother heard her own mother say and then there was only a roaring in the air
around her a new pain where once there wasn't pain a hollowness where only
minutes before she had been whole.
good news
Months before the bone-cold Buckeye winter settles over Ohio, the last
September light brings my older sister,
named
Odella Caroline after my uncle Odell and my aunt Caroline.
In South Carolina, the phone rings.
As my mother's mother moves toward it, she closes her eyes,
then opens them to look out over her yard.
As she reaches for it, she watches the way the light slips through the heavy pine
needles, dapples everything with sweet September light . . .
Her hand on the phone now, she lifts it praying silently
for the good news
the sweet chill of autumn is finally bringing her way.
my mother and grace
It is the South that brings my mother and my father's mother, Grace, together.
Grace's family is from Greenville, too.
So my mother
is home to her, in a way her own kids can't understand.
You know how those Woodsons are, Grace says.
The Woodsons this and the North that
making Mama smile, remember that Grace, too, was someone else before.
Remember that Grace, like my mother, wasn't always a Woodson.
They are home to each other, Grace to my mother is as familiar as the Greenville
air.
Both know that southern way of talking without words, remember when the heat
of summer
could melt the mouth,
so southerners stayed quiet looked out over the land,
nodded at what seemed like nothing but that silent nod said everything anyone
needed to hear.
Here in Ohio, my mother and Grace aren't afraid
of too much air between words, are happy just for another familiar body in the
room.
But the few words in my mother's mouth become the missing
after Odell dies-a different silence than either of them has ever known.
I'm sorry about your brother, Grace says.
Guess God needed him back and sent you a baby girl.
But both of them know
the hole that is the missing isn't filled now.
Uhmm, my mother says.
Bless the dead and the living, Grace says.
Then more silence
both of them knowing
there's nothing left to say.
each winter
Each winter
just as the first of the snow begins to fall, my mother goes home to South
Carolina.
Sometimes,
my father goes with her but mostly, he doesn't.
So she gets on the bus alone.
The first year with one, the second year with two, and finally with three children,
Hope and Dell hugging each leg and me
in her arms. Always there is a fight before she leaves.
Ohio
is where my father wants to be but to my mother
Ohio will never be home, no matter
how many plants she brings indoors each winter, singing softly to them, the lilt
of her words a breath of warm air moving over each leaf.
In return, they hold on to their color even as the snow begins to fall. A reminder
of the deep green South. A promise of life
somewhere.
journey
You can keep your South, my father says.
The way they treated us down there,
I got your mama out as quick as I could.
Brought her right up here to Ohio.
Told her there's never gonna be a Woodson
that sits in the back of the bus.
Never gonna be a Woodson that has to
Yes sir and No sir white people.
Never gonna be a Woodson made to look down
at the ground.
All you kids are stronger than that, my father says.
All you Woodson kids deserve to be
as good as you already are.
Yes sirree, Bob, my father says.
You can keep your South Carolina.
greenville, south carolina, 1963
On the bus, my mother moves with us to the back.
It is 1963
in South Carolina.
Too dangerous to sit closer to the front
and dare the driver to make her move. Not with us. Not now.
Me in her arms all of three months old. My sister and brother squeezed into the
seat beside her. White shirt, tie, and my brother's head shaved clean.
My sister's braids white ribboned.
Sit up straight, my mother says.
She tells my brother to take his fingers
out of his mouth.
They do what is asked of them.
Although they don't know why they have to.
This isn't Ohio, my mother says,
as though we understand.
Her mouth a small lipsticked dash, her back sharp as a line. DO NOT CROSS!
COLOREDS TO THE BACK!
Step off the curb if a white person comes toward you don't look them in the eye.
Yes sir. No sir.
My apologies.
Her eyes straight ahead, my mother
is miles away from here.
Then her mouth softens, her hand moves gently over my brother's warm head.
He is three years old, his wide eyes open to the world, his too-big ears
already listening. We're as good as anybody,
my mother whispers.
As good as anybody.
home
Soon . . .
We are near my other grandparents' house,
small red stone, immense yard surrounding it.
Hall Street.
A front porch swing thirsty for oil.
A pot of azaleas blooming.
A pine tree.
Red dirt wafting up
around my mother's newly polished shoes.
Welcome home, my grandparents say.
Their warm brown arms around us. A white handkerchief,
embroidered with blue to wipe away my mother's tears. And me, the new
baby, set deep inside this love.
the cousins
It's my mother's birthday and the music is turned up loud.
Her cousins all around her-the way it was
before she left.
The same cousins she played with as a girl.
Remember the time, they ask,
When we stole Miz Carter's peach pie off her windowsill,
got stuck in that ditch down below Todd's house,
climbed that fence and snuck into Greenville pool,
weren't scared about getting arrested either, shoot!
nobody telling us where we can and can't swim!
And she laughs, remembering it all.
On the radio, Sam Cooke is singing
“Twistin' the Night Away": Let me tell you 'bout a place
Somewhere up-a New York way
The cousins have come from as far away as Spartanburg the boys dressed in
skinny-legged pants, the girls in flowy skirts that swirl out, when they spin
twisting the night away.
Cousin Dorothy's fiancé, holding tight to her hand
as they twist Cousin Sam dancing with Mama, ready to catch her
if she falls, he says and my mother remembers being a little girl,
looking down scared from a high-up tree
and seeing her cousin there-waiting.
Here they have a lot of fun
Puttin' trouble on the run
Twistin' the night away.
I knew you weren't staying up North, the cousins say.
You belong here with us.
My mother throws her head back,
her newly pressed and curled hair gleaming her smile the same one she had
before she left for Columbus.
She's MaryAnn Irby again. Georgiana and Gunnar's
youngest daughter.
She's home.
night bus
My father arrives on a night bus, his hat in his hands.
It is May now and the rain is coming down.
Later with the end of this rain will come the sweet smell of honeysuckle but
for now, there is only the sky opening and my father's tears.
I'm sorry, he whispers.
This fight is over for now.
Tomorrow, we will travel as a family back to Columbus, Ohio,
Hope and Dell fighting for a place on my father's lap. Greenville with its
separate ways growing small behind us.
For now, my parents stand hugging
in the warm Carolina rain.
No past.
No future.
Just this perfect Now.
after greenville #1
After the chicken is fried and wrapped in wax paper, tucked gently into
cardboard shoe boxes
and tied with string . . .
After the corn bread is cut into wedges, the peaches washed and dried . . .
After the sweet tea is poured into mason jars
twisted tight and the deviled eggs are scooped back inside
their egg-white beds slipped into porcelain bowls that are my mother's now,
a gift her mother sends with her on the journey . . .
After the clothes are folded back into suitcases, the hair ribbons and shirts
washed and ironed . . .
After my mother's lipstick is on and my father's scratchy beginnings of a beard
are gone . . .
After our faces are coated
with a thin layer of Vaseline gently wiped off again with a cool, wet cloth . . .
then it is time to say our good-byes,
the small clutch of us children pressed against my grandmother's apron, her
tears quickly blinked away . . .
After the night falls and it is safe
for brown people to leave the South without getting stopped
and sometimes beaten
and always questioned:
Are you one of those Freedom Riders?
Are you one of those Civil Rights People?
What gives you the right . . . ?
We board the Greyhound bus, bound
for Ohio.
rivers
The Hocking River moves like a flowing arm away from the Ohio River runs
through towns as though it's chasing its own freedom, the same way the Ohio
runs north from Virginia until it's safely away from the South.
Each town the Hocking touches tells a story: Athens
Coolville
Lancaster
Nelsonville,
each
waits for the Hocking water to wash through. Then as though the river
remembers where it belongs
and what it belongs to, it circles back, joins up with
the Ohio again as if to say,
I'm sorry.
as if to say,
I went away from here
but now
I'm home again.
leaving columbus
When my parents fight for the final time, my older brother is four,
my sister is nearly three, and I have just celebrated my first birthday without
celebration.
There is only one photograph of them
from their time together a wedding picture, torn from a local newspaper him
in a suit and tie,
her in a bride gown, beautiful although neither one
is smiling.
Only one photograph.
Maybe the memory of Columbus was too much for my mother to save
anymore.
Maybe the memory of my mother was a painful stone inside my father's heart.
But what did it look like when she finally left him?
A woman nearly six feet tall, straight-backed and proud, heading down
a cold Columbus street, two small children beside her and a still-crawling baby
in her arms.
My father, whose reddish-brown skin would later remind me
of the red dirt of the South and all that was rich about it, standing in the yard,
one hand
on the black metal railing, the other lifting into a weak wave good-bye.
As though we were simply guests leaving Sunday supper.

our names
In South Carolina, we become The Grandchildren
Gunnar's Three Little Ones
Sister Irby's Grands
MaryAnn's Babies
And when we are called by our names my grandmother
makes them all one
HopeDellJackie
but my grandfather
takes his sweet time, saying each as if he has all day long or a whole lifetime.
ohio behind us
When we ask our mother how long we'll be here, sometimes she says for a
while and sometimes she tells us not to ask anymore because she doesn't
know how long we'll stay in the house where she grew up on the land she's
always known.
When we ask, she tells us
this is where she used to belong but her sister, Caroline, our aunt Kay, has
moved to the North,
her brother Odell is dead now, and her baby brother, Robert, says he's almost
saved enough money to follow Caroline to New York City.
Maybe I should go there, too, my mother says.
Everyone else, she says, has a new place to be now.
Everyone else
has gone away.
And now coming back home
isn't really coming back home at all.
the garden
Each spring
the dark Nicholtown dirt is filled with the promise
of what the earth can give back to you if you work the land
plant the seeds
pull the weeds.
My southern grandfather missed slavery by one generation. His grandfather had
been owned.
His father worked
the land from dawn till dusk for the promise of cotton and a little pay.
So this is what he believes in your hands in the cool dirt until the earth gives
back to you all that you've asked of it.
Sweet peas and collards, green peppers and cukes lettuce and melon,
berries and peaches and one day when I'm able, my grandfather says, I'm gonna
figure out how to grow myself a pecan tree.
God gives you what you need, my grandmother says.
Best not to ask for more than that.
Hmph, my grandfather says. And goes back to working the land, pulling from it
all we need and more than that.
gunnar's children
At dusk, just as the fireflies flicker on, my grandfather makes his way
home.
We see him coming slow down the road, his silver lunch box bouncing soft
against his leg. Now, as he gets closer, we hear him singing:
“Where will the wedding supper be?
Way down yonder in a hollow tree. Uh hmmm . . ."
Good evening, Miz Clara. Evening, Miz Mae.
How's that leg, Miz Bell?
What you cooking, Auntie Charlotte, you thinking
of making me something to eat?
His voice ringing down Hall Street, circling round the roads of Nicholtown and
maybe out into the big, wide world . . .
Maybe all the way up in New York, Aunt Kay's hearing it, and thinking about
coming on home . . .
Then he is close enough to run to-the three of us climbing him like a tree until
he laughs out loud.
We call him Daddy.
This is what our mother calls him.
This is all we know now.
Our daddy seems taller than anyone else in all of Greenville.
More handsome, too-
His square jaw and light brown eyes so different from our own narrow-faced,
dark-eyed selves. Still, his hand is warm and strong around my own
as I skip beside him, the wind blowing up around us. He says, Y'all are
Gunnar's children.
Just keep remembering that.
Just keep remembering . . .
This is the way of Nicholtown evenings, Daddy
coming home,
me
jumping into his arms, the others
circling around him
all of us grinning
all of us talking
all of us loving him up.
at the end of the day
There are white men working at the printing press beside Daddy, their fingers
blackened with ink so that at the end of the day, palms up it's hard to tell who
is white and who is not, still they call my grandfather Gunnar, even though
he's a foreman and is supposed to be called Mr. Irby.
But he looks the white men in the eye sees the way so many of them can't
understand a colored man
telling them what they need to do.
This is new. Too fast for them.
The South is changing.
Sometimes they don't listen.
Sometimes they walk away.
At the end of the day, the newspaper is printed, the machines are shut down and
each man punches a clock and leaves but only Colored folks
come home to Nicholtown.
Here, you can't look right or left or up or down without seeing brown people.
Colored Town. Brown Town. Even a few mean words to say where we live.
My grandmother tells us it's the way of the South. Colored folks used to stay
where they were told that they belonged. But
times are changing.
And people are itching to go where they want.
This evening, though,
I am happy to belong
to Nicholtown.
daywork
There is daywork for colored women.
In the mornings their dark bodies fill the crosstown buses,
taking them away
from Nicholtown
to the other side
of Greenville
where the white people live.
Our grandmother tells us this
as she sets a small hat with a topaz pin on her head, pulls white gloves
over her soft brown hands.
Two days a week, she joins the women, taking on this second job now
that there are four more mouths to feed and the money
she gets from part-time teaching isn't enough anymore. I'm not ashamed, she
says, cleaning is what I know. I'm not ashamed,
if it feeds my children.
When she returns in the evening, her hands are ashen from washing other
people's clothes, Most often by hand,
her ankles swollen from standing all day making beds and sweeping floors,
shaking dust from curtains,
picking up after other people's children, cooking, the list
goes on and on.
Don't any of you ever do daywork, she warns us.
I'm doing it now so you don't have to.
And maybe all across Nicholtown, other children are hearing this, too.
Get the Epsom salts, she says, leaning back into the soft brown chair, her eyes
closing.
When she isn't in it, Hope, Dell and I squeeze in side by side by side and still,
there is space left for one more.
We fill a dishpan with warm water, pour the salts in, swirl it around and
carefully carry it to her feet. We fight to see who will get to rub the swelling
from my grandmother's ankles, the smile back onto her face,
the stories back into the too-quiet room.
You could have eaten off the floor by the time
I left this one house today,
my grandmother begins, letting out a heavy sigh. But
let me tell you,
when I first got there, you would have thought
the Devil himself had come through . . .
lullaby
At night, every living thing competes for a chance to be heard.
The crickets
and frogs call out.
Sometimes, there's the soft who-whoo of an owl lost amid the pines.
Even the dogs won't rest until they've howled
at the moon.
But the crickets always win, long after the frogs stop croaking and the owl has
found its way home.
Long after the dogs have lain down losing the battle against sleep, the crickets
keep going as though they know their song is our lullaby.
bible times
My grandmother keeps her Bible on a shelf beside her bed. When the day is
over, she reads quietly to herself, and in the morning she'll tell us the stories,
how Noah listened
to God's word
pulled two of each animal inside his ark, waited for the rains to come and floated
safely as the sinners drowned.
It's morning now and we have floated safely through the Nicholtown night, our
evening prayers
Jehovah, please give us another day,
now answered.
Biscuits warm and buttered stop halfway to our mouths. How much rain did it
take
to destroy the sinners? What lies did they tell
to die such a death? How loud was the rain
when it came? How did Noah know
that the cobra wouldn't bite, the bull
wouldn't charge, the bee wouldn't sting?
Our questions come fast but we want the stories more than we want the answers
so when my grandmother says, Hush, so I can tell it!
We do.
Jacob's dream of a ladder to heaven, and Jesus with the children surrounding
him. Moses on the mountain, fire burning words into stone.
Even Salome intrigues us, her wish for a man's head on a platter-who could
want this and live to tell the story of that wanting?
Autumn is coming.
Outside, there's the sound of wind through the pine trees.
But inside there are stories, there are biscuits and grits and eggs, the fire in the
potbellied stove already filling the house with warmth.
Still we shiver at the thought of evil Salome, chew our biscuits slowly.
We are safe here-miles and years away from Bible Times.
the reader
When we can't find my sister, we know she is under the kitchen table, a book in
her hand, a glass of milk and a small bowl of peanuts beside her.
We know we can call Odella's name out loud, slap the table hard with our
hands, dance around it singing
“She'll Be Coming 'Round the Mountain"
so many times the song makes us sick and the circling makes us dizzy and still
my sister will do nothing more than slowly turn the page.
the beginning
I cannot write a word yet but at three, I now know the letter J
love the way it curves into a hook that I carefully top with a straight hat the way
my sister has taught me to do. Love the sound of the letter and the promise
that one day this will be connected to a full name, my own
that I will be able to write by myself.
Without my sister's hand over mine, making it do what I cannot yet do.
How amazing these words are that slowly come to me.
How wonderfully on and on they go.
Will the words end, I ask whenever I remember to.
Nope, my sister says, all of five years old now, and promising me
infinity.
hope
The South doesn't agree with my brother.
The heat sandpapers his skin.
Don't scratch, my grandmother warns. But he does and the skin grows raw
beneath his fingers.
The pollen leaves him puffy eyed, his small breaths come quick, have too much
sound around them.
He moves slow, sickly now where once he was strong.
And when his body isn't betraying him, Ohio does.
The memories waking him in the night, the view from my father's shoulders, the
wonder of the Nelsonville house, the air so easy to breathe . . .
You can keep your South, my father had said.
Now Hope stays mostly quiet unless asked to speak, his head bent inside the
superhero comic books my grandfather brings home on Fridays. Hope
searches for himself inside their pages. Leaves them dog-eared by Monday
morning.
The South
his mortal enemy.
The South,
his Kryptonite.
the almost friends
There's the boy from up the road with the hole in his heart. Some afternoons he
comes to sit in our yard and listen to our stories. Our aunt Kay, we tell him,
lives in New York City and maybe we will, too, someday. And yes it's true,
once we lived in Ohio, that's why we speak the way we do.
We don't ask about the hole in his heart. Our grandmother warns us we know
better than that.
There is Cora and her sisters, across the road.
One word in my grandmother's mouth-You stay away
from Coraandhersisters, their mother left the family, ran off
with their church pastor.
Coraandhersisters
sometimes
sit watching us.
We watch them back not asking what it feels like not to have a mother because
our grandmother warns us
we know better than that.
There are three brothers who live down the road we know this only because
our grandmother tells us. They live inside their dark house
all summer, coming out
in the evening when their mother returns from work long after we've bathed and
slipped into our summer pajamas, books curled into our arms.
These are our almost friends, the people we think about when we're tired of
playing with each other.
But our grandmother says, Three is plenty. Three is a team.
Find something to do together.
And so over and over again, we do. Even though we want to ask her, Why can't
we play with them? we don't.
We know better than that.
the right way to speak
The first time my brother says ain't my mother pulls a branch from the willow
tree growing down the hill at the edge
of our backyard.
As she slips her closed hand over it, removing the leaves,
my brother begins to cry
because the branch is a switch now no longer beautifully weeping at the bottom
of the hill.
It whirs as my mother whips it through the air and down
against my brother's legs.
You will never, my mother says, say ain't in this house.
You will never
say ain't anywhere.
Each switching is a warning to us our words are to remain
crisp and clear.
We are never to say huh?
ain't or y'all
git or gonna.
Never ma'am-just yes, with eyes meeting eyes enough
to show respect.
Don't ever ma'am anyone!
The word too painful
a memory for my mother
of not-so-long-ago
southern subservient days . . .
The list of what not to say goes on and on . . .
You are from the North, our mother says.
You know the right way to speak.
As the switch raises dark welts on my brother's legs Dell and I look on
afraid to open our mouths. Fearing the South will slip out or
into them.
the candy lady
On Fridays, our grandfather takes us to the candy lady's house,
even though our grandmother worries he's going to be the cause of our teeth
rotting right out of our heads.
But my grandfather just laughs, makes us open our mouths
to show the strong Irby teeth we've inherited from his side of the family.
The three of us stand there, our mouths open wide, strong white teeth inside,
and my grandmother has to nod, has to say, They're lucky before sending us on
our way.
The candy lady's small living room is filled with shelves and shelves of
chocolate bars and gumdrops, Good & Plenty and Jujubes, Moon Pies and
Necco Wafers,
lollipops and long red licorice strings.
So much candy that it's hard to choose until our grandfather says,
Get what you want but I'm getting myself some ice cream.
Then the candy lady, who is gray-haired and never smiles, disappears
into another room and returns a few minutes later with a wafer cone, pale yellow
lemon-chiffon ice cream dripping from it.
Outside, even this late in the afternoon, the sun is beating down
and the idea of lemon-chiffon ice cream cooling us, even for a few minutes,
makes us all start saying at once-Me, too, Daddy.
Me, too, Daddy. Me, too.
The walk home from the candy lady's house is a quiet one
except for the sound of melting ice cream being slurped up
fast, before it slides past our wrists, on down our arms and onto
the hot, dry road.
south carolina at war
Because we have a right, my grandfather tells us- we are sitting at his feet and
the story tonight is why people are marching all over the South- to walk and
sit and dream wherever we want.
First they brought us here.
Then we worked for free. Then it was 1863,
and we were supposed to be free but we weren't.
And that's why people are so mad.
And it's true, we can't turn on the radio without hearing about the marching.
We can't go to downtown Greenville without seeing the teenagers walking into
stores, sitting where brown people still aren't allowed to sit and getting
carried out, their bodies limp,
their faces calm.
This is the way brown people have to fight,
my grandfather says.
You can't just put your fist up. You have to insist
on something
gently. Walk toward a thing
slowly.
But be ready to die,
my grandfather says,
for what is right.
Be ready to die, my grandfather says, for everything you believe in.
And none of us can imagine death
but we try to imagine it anyway.
Even my mother joins the fight.
When she thinks our grandmother
isn't watching she sneaks out
to meet the cousins downtown, but just as
she's stepping through the door, her good dress and gloves on, my
grandmother says, Now don't go getting arrested.
And Mama sounds like a little girl when she says, I won't.
More than a hundred years, my grandfather says, and we're still fighting for the
free life
we're supposed to be living.
So there's a war going on in South Carolina and even as we play
and plant and preach and sleep, we are a part of it.
Because you're colored, my grandfather says.
And just as good and bright and beautiful and free
as anybody.
And nobody colored in the South is stopping,
my grandfather says,
until everybody knows what's true.
the training
When my mother's older cousin
and best friend, Dorothy,
comes with her children, they run off saying they can't understand
the way Hope, Dell and I speak.
Y'all go too fast, they say.
And the words get all pushed together.
They say they don't feel like playing with us little kids. So they leave us to walk
the streets of Nicholtown when we can't leave the porch.
We watch them go, hear
Cousin Dorothy say, Don't you knuckleheads
get into trouble out there.
Then we stay close to Cousin Dorothy, make believe we're not listening when
she knows we are.
Laughing when she laughs, shaking our own heads when she shakes
hers. You know how you have to get those trainings,
she says, and our mother nods. They
won't let you sit at the counters
without them. Have to know what to do
when those people come at you.
She has a small space between her teeth like my mother's space, and Hope's and
Dell's, too.
She is tall and dark-skinned,
beautiful and broad shouldered.
She wears gloves and dark-colored dresses made for her by a seamstress in
Charleston.
The trainings take place in the basements of churches and the back rooms of
stores,
on long car trips and anywhere else where people can gather. They learn
how to change the South without violence, how to not be moved
by the evil actions of others, how to walk slowly but with deliberate steps.
How to sit at counters and be cursed at without cursing back, have food and
drinks poured over them without standing up and hurting someone.
Even the teenagers
get trained to sit tall, not cry, swallow back fear.
But Lord, Cousin Dorothy says. Everybody has a line.
When I'm walking
up to that lunch counter and taking my seat,
I pray to God, don't let
anybody spit on me. I can be Sweet Dorothy
seven days a week, twenty-four hours a day
as long as nobody crosses that line. Because if they do,
this nonviolent movement
is over!
the blanket
The first time my mother goes to New York City it is only for a long-weekend
visit, her kiss on our cheeks
as much a promise as the excitement in her eyes.
I'll bring something back for each of you.
It's Friday night and the weekend ahead is already calling us
to the candy lady's house, my hand in Daddy's.
He doesn't know how to say no,
my grandmother complains.
But neither does she,
dresses and socks and ribbons, our hair pressed and curled.
She calls my sister and me her baby girls, smiles proudly when the women say
how pretty we are.
So the first time my mother goes to New York City we don't know to be sad, the
weight of our grandparents' love like a blanket with us beneath it,
safe and warm.
miss bell and the marchers
They look like regular people visiting our neighbor Miss Bell, foil-covered
dishes held out in front of them as they arrive
some in pairs,
some alone,
some just little kids
holding their mothers' hands.
If you didn't know, you'd think it was just an evening gathering. Maybe church
people heading into Miss Bell's house to talk about God. But when Miss Bell
pulls her blinds closed, the people fill their dinner plates with food, their
glasses with sweet tea and gather to talk about marching.
And even though Miss Bell works for a white lady who said I will fire you in a
minute if I ever see you
on that line!
Miss Bell knows that marching isn't the only thing she can do,
knows that people fighting need full bellies to think and safe places to gather.
She knows the white lady isn't the only one who's watching, listening, waiting,
to end this fight. So she keeps the marchers'
glasses filled, adds more corn bread and potato salad to their plates, stands in the
kitchen ready to slice lemon pound cake into generous pieces.
And in the morning, just before she pulls her uniform from the closet, she prays,
God, please give me and those people marching
another day.
Amen.
how to listen #2
In the stores downtown
we're always followed around
just because we're brown.
hair night
Saturday night smells of biscuits and burning hair.
Supper done and my grandmother has transformed the kitchen into a beauty
shop. Laid across the table is the hot comb, Dixie Peach hair grease, horsehair
brush, parting stick and one girl at a time.
Jackie first, my sister says, our freshly washed hair damp
and spiraling over toweled shoulders and pale cotton nightgowns.
She opens her book to the marked page, curls up in a chair pulled close to the
wood-burning stove, bowl of peanuts in her lap.
The words
in her books are so small, I have to squint to see the letters. Hans Brinker or The
Silver Skates.
The House at Pooh Corner. Swiss Family Robinson.
Thick books
dog-eared from the handing down from neighbor to neighbor. My sister handles
them gently, marks the pages with torn brown pieces of paper bag, wipes her
hands before going beyond the hardbound covers.
Read to me, I say, my eyes and scalp already stinging from the tug of the brush
through my hair.
And while my grandmother sets the hot comb on the flame, heats it just enough
to pull my tight curls straighter, my sister's voice wafts over the kitchen,
past the smell of hair and oil and flame, settles like a hand on my shoulder and
holds me there.
I want silver skates like Hans's, a place on a desert island. I have never seen the
ocean but this, too, I can imagine-blue water pouring over red dirt.
As my sister reads, the pictures begin forming as though someone has turned on
a television, lowered the sound,
pulled it up close.
Grainy black-and-white pictures come slowly at me Deep. Infinite. Remembered
On a bright December morning long ago . . .
My sister's clear soft voice opens up the world to me.
I lean in
so hungry for it.
Hold still now, my grandmother warns.
So I sit on my hands to keep my mind off my hurting head, and my whole body
still.
But the rest of me is already leaving, the rest of me is already gone.
family names
There's James, Joseph, Andrew, Geneva, Annie Mae,
William, Lucinda, David, Talmudge,
my grandmother says. All together,
my mama gave birth to thirteen children.
Our heads spin at the thought of that many brothers and sisters. Three died as
babies, she says, but only a little of the spinning stops.
There's Levonia, Montague, Iellus, Hallique, Valie Mae, Virdie and Elora on
my daddy's side.
We can't help but laugh each time our daddy tells us the names of his brothers
and sisters.
His own name,
Gunnar, sends us laughing all over again.
Gave their kids names
that no master could ever take away.
What about Bob or Joe? Hope wants to know.
What about
John or Michael? Or something real normal, like Hope?
Hope is not normal, my sister says. Not for a boy. I think
your name is a mistake. Maybe they meant
to name you Virdie.
I'm the great Hope of the family, my brother says.
Just like Grandpa Hope.
Just like Hope the Dope, my sister says back.
Keep up the arguing, my grandfather says, I'll take you both down to city hall.
People be happy to call you Talmudge and Valie Mae.
american dream
Even when my girls were little, we'd go down there,
my grandmother tells us. And people'd be marching.
The marching didn't just start yesterday.
Police with those dogs, scared everybody
near to death. Just once
I let my girls march.
My grandmother leans back in her brown chair, her feet still in the Epsom salts
water, her fingers tapping out
some silent tune. She closes her eyes.
I let them and I prayed.
What's the thing, I ask her, that would make people
want to live together?
People have to want it, that's all.
We get quiet-maybe all of us are thinking about the ones who want it. And the
ones who don't.
We all have the same dream, my grandmother says.
To live equal in a country that's supposed to be
the land of the free.
She lets out a long breath,
deep remembering.
When your mother was little
she wanted a dog. But I said no.
Quick as you can blink, I told her, a dog will turn on you.
So my mother brought kittens home, soft and purring inside of empty boxes
mewing and mewing until my grandmother fell in love. And let her keep
them.
My grandmother tells us all this as we sit at her feet, each story like a
photograph we can look right into, see our mother there marchers and dogs
and kittens all blending and us now
there in each moment
beside her.
the fabric store
Some Fridays, we walk to downtown Greenville where there are some clothing
stores, some restaurants, a motel and the five-and-dime store but my
grandmother won't take us
into any of those places anymore.
Even the five-and-dime, which isn't segregated now but where a woman is paid,
my grandmother says, to follow colored people around in case they try to
steal something. We don't go into the restaurants because they always seat us
near the kitchen.
When we go downtown,
we go to the fabric store, where the white woman knows my grandmother
from back in Anderson, asks,
How's Gunnar doing and your girls in New York?
She rolls fabric out for my grandmother to rub between her fingers.
They discuss drape and nap and where to cinch the waist on a skirt for a child.
At the fabric store, we are not Colored or Negro. We are not thieves or shameful
or something to be hidden away.
At the fabric store, we're just people.
ghosts
In downtown Greenville,
they painted over the WHITE ONLY signs,
except on the bathroom doors,
they didn't use a lot of paint
so you can still see the words, right there
like a ghost standing in front
still keeping you out.
the leavers
We watch men leave Greenville in their one good suit, shoes spit shined.
We watch women leave in Sunday clothes, hatted and lipsticked and white
gloved.
We watch them catch buses in the evening, the black shadows of their backs the
last we see of them.
Others fill their cars with bags.
Whole families disappearing into the night.
People waving good-bye.
They say the City is a place where diamonds speckle the sidewalk. Money falls
from the sky.
They say a colored person can do well going there.
All you need is the fare out of Greenville.
All you need is to know somebody on the other side, waiting to cross you over.
Like the River Jordan
and then you're in Paradise.
the beginning of the leaving
When my mother returns from New York she has a new plan-all of us are
going to move there. We don't know
anyplace else but Greenville now-New York is only the pictures she shows us
in magazines and the two she has in her pocketbook of our aunt Kay. In one,
there are two other people
standing with her.
Bernie and Peaches, our mother tells us.
We all used to be friends
here in Nicholtown.
That's all the young kids used to talk about,
our grandmother tells us,
going to New York City.
My mother smiles at us and says, We'll be going to New York City.
I just have to figure some things out first, that's all.
I don't know what I'd do without you all up under me,
my grandmother says and there's a sadness in her voice.
Don't know what I'd do, she says again.
Even sadder this time.
as a child, i smelled the air
Mama takes her coffee out to the front porch sips it slow. Two steps down and
her feet are covered in grass and dew.
New York doesn't smell like this, she says.
I follow her, the dew cool against my feet the soft hush of wind through leaves
my mother and I
alone together.
Her coffee is sweetened with condensed milk, her hair pulled back into a braid,
her dark fingers circling her cup.
If I ask, she will hold it to my lips, let me taste the bittersweet of it.
It's dawn and the birds have come alive, chasing each other from maple to pine
and back to maple again. This is how time passes here.
The maple will be bare-branched come winter,
Mama says. But the pines, they just keep on living.
And the air is what I'll remember.
Even once we move to New York.
It always smelled like this, my mother says.
Wet grass and pine.
Like memory.
harvest time
When Daddy's garden is ready it is filled with words that make me laugh when I
say them- pole beans and tomatoes, okra and corn
sweet peas and sugar snaps,
lettuce and squash.
Who could have imagined so much color that the ground disappears and we are
left walking through an autumn's worth of crazy words
that beneath the magic of my grandmother's hands become
side dishes.
grown folks' stories
Warm autumn night with the crickets crying the smell of pine coming soft on the
wind and the women
on the porch, quilts across their laps, Aunt Lucinda, Miss Bell and whatever
neighbor has a breath or two left at the end of the day for sitting and running
our mouths.
That's when we listen
to the grown folks talking.
Hope, Dell and me sitting quiet on the stairs.
We know one word from us will bring a hush upon the women, my
grandmother's finger suddenly pointing toward the house, her soft-spoken I
think it's time for you kids to go to bed now ushering us into our room. So we
are silent, our backs against posts and the back of the stairs, Hope's elbows
on his knees, head down. Now is when we learn everything
there is to know
about the people down the road and in the daywork houses,
about the Sisters at the Kingdom Hall and the faraway relatives we rarely see.
Long after the stories are told, I remember them, whisper them back to Hope
and Dell late into the night:
She's the one who left Nicholtown in the daytime
the one Grandmama says wasn't afraid
of anything. Retelling each story.
Making up what I didn't understand or missed when voices dropped too low, I
talk until my sister and brother's soft breaths tell me they've fallen
asleep.
Then I let the stories live
inside my head, again and again until the real world fades back into cricket
lullabies
and my own dreams.
tobacco
Summer is over, a kiss
of chill in the southern air. We see the dim orange of my grandfather's cigarette,
as he makes his way down the darkening road. Hear his evening greetings
and the coughing that follows them.
Not enough breath left now to sing so I sing for him, in my head where only I
can hear.
Where will the wedding supper be?
Way down yonder in a hollow tree. Uh hmmm . . .
The old people used to say a pinch of dirt in the mouth can tell tobacco's story:
what crops
are ready for picking
what needs to be left to grow.
What soil is rich enough for planting and the patches of land that need a year of
rest.
I do not know yet
how sometimes the earth makes a promise it can never keep. Tobacco fields lay
fallow, crops picked clean.
My grandfather coughs again and the earth waits
for what and who it will get in return.
how to listen #3
Middle of the night
my grandfather is coughing
me upright. Startled.
my mother leaving greenville
It is late autumn now, the smell of wood burning, the potbellied stove like a
warm soft hand in the center of my grandparents' living room, its black pipe
stretching into the ceiling then disappearing.
So many years have passed since we last saw our father, his absence
like a bubble in my older brother's life, that pops again and again into a whole
lot of tiny bubbles of memory.
You were just a baby, he says to me.
You're so lucky you don't remember the fighting
or anything.
It's like erasers came through her memory, my sister says.
Erase. Erase. Erase.
But now, my mother is leaving again.
This, I will remember.
halfway home #1
New York, my mother says.
Soon, I'll find us a place there. Come back
and bring you all home.
She wants a place of her own that is not The Nelsonville House, The Columbus
House, The Greenville House.
Looking for her next place.
Our next place.
Right now, our mother says, we're only halfway home.
And I imagine her standing in the middle of a road, her arms out fingers pointing
North and South.
I want to ask:
Will there always be a road?
Will there always be a bus?
Will we always have to choose between home
and home?
my mother looks back on greenville
After our dinner and bath, after our powdered and pajamaed bodies are tucked
three across into bed, after Winnie the Pooh and kisses on our foreheads and
longer-than-usual hugs, my mother walks away from the house on Hall Street
out into the growing night, down a long dusty road to where the Nicholtown
bus takes her to the Greyhound station then more dust
then she's gone.
New York ahead of her, her family behind, she moves to the back, her purse in
her lap, the land
pulling her gaze to the window once more.
Before darkness
covers it and for many hours, there are only shadows and stars
and tears
and hope.
the last fireflies
We know our days are counted here.
Each evening we wait for the first light of the last fireflies, catch them in jars
then let them go again. As though we understand their need for freedom.
As though our silent prayers to stay in Greenville will be answered if
we do what we know is right.
changes
Now the evenings are quiet with my mother gone as though the night is listening
to the way we are counting the days. We know even the feel of our
grandmother's brush being pulled gently through our hair will fast become a
memory. Those Saturday evenings at her kitchen table, the smell of Dixie
Peach hair grease,
the sizzle of the straightening comb, the hiss of the iron
against damp, newly washed ribbons, all of this may happen again, but in
another place.
We sit on our grandparents' porch, shivering already against the coming winter,
and talk softly about Greenville summer, how when we come back,
we'll do all the stuff we always did, hear the same stories,
laugh at the same jokes, catch fireflies in the same mason jars, promise each
other future summers that are as good as the past.
But we know we are lying
coming home will be different now.
This place called Greenville this neighborhood called Nicholtown will change
some
and so will each of us.
sterling high school, greenville
While my mother is away in New York City, a fire sweeps through her old high
school
during a senior dance.
Smoke filled the crowded room and the music
stopped
and the students dancing stopped
and the DJ told them to quickly leave the building.
The fire
lasted all night
and when it was over, my mother's high school had burned nearly to the ground.
My mother said it was because the students had been marching, and the
marching
made some white people in Greenville mad.
After the fire the students weren't allowed to go to the all-white high school.
Instead they had to crowd in beside their younger sisters and brothers at the
lower school.
In the photos from my mother's high school yearbook- The Torch, 1959, my
mother is smiling beside her cousin Dorothy Ann and on her other side, there
is Jesse Jackson, who maybe was already dreaming of one day being the first
brown man to run for president.
And not even
the torching of their school could stop him or the marchers from changing the
world.
faith
After my mother leaves, my grandmother pulls us further
into the religion she has always known.
We become Jehovah's Witnesses like her.
After my mother leaves there is no one
to say,
The children can choose their own faith
when they're old enough.
In my house, my grandmother says, you will do as I do.
After my mother leaves, we wake in the middle of the night calling out for her.
Have faith, my grandmother says pulling us to her in the darkness.
Let the Bible,
my grandmother says, become your sword and your shield.
But we do not know yet who we are fighting and what we are fighting for.
the stories cora tells
In the evening now
Coraandhersisters come over to our porch.
There are three of them
and three of us but Hope
moves away from the girls
sits by himself
out in the yard.
And even though my grandmother tells us not to play with them,
she doesn't call us into the house anymore when she sees them walking down
the road. Maybe her heart moves over a bit making room for them.
A colorful mushroom grows beneath the pine tree. Purple and gold and strange
against the pine-needled ground.
When I step on it,
Coraandhersisters scream at me, You just killed the Devil while he was sleeping!
Sleeping in his own house.
Cora warns me
the Devil will soon be alive again.
She says, He's going to come for you,
late in the night while you're sleeping
and the God y'all pray to won't be there protecting you.
I cry as the sun sets, waiting.
Cry until my grandmother comes out shoos Coraandhersisters home holds me
tight
tells me they are lying.
That's just some crazy southern superstition,
my grandmother says.
Those girls must be a little simple not knowing
a mushroom when they see one.
Don't believe everything you hear, Jackie.
Someday, you'll come to know
when someone is telling the truth
and when they're just making up stories.
hall street
In the early evening, just before the best light for hide-and-seek
takes over the sky,
it's Bible-study time. We watch from our places on the front porch, our cold
hands cupped around hot chocolate
half gone and sweetest at the bottom as the Brother and Sister
from the Kingdom Hall make their way up our road.
Pretty Monday evening, the Brother from the Kingdom Hall says.
Thank Jehovah, the Sister from the Kingdom Hall says back.
We are silent, Brother Hope, Sister Dell and me.
None of us want to sit inside when the late autumn is calling to us
and frogs are finally feeling brave enough to hop across our yard. We want
anything but this. We want warm biscuits and tag and jacks on the porch, our
too-long sweater sleeves
getting in the way sometimes.
But we are Jehovah's Witnesses. Monday night is Bible-study time.
Somewhere else,
my grandfather is
spending time with his brother Vertie.
Maybe they are playing the harmonica and banjo, laughing and singing loud.
Doing what's fun to do on a pretty Monday evening.
Jehovah promises us everlasting life in the New World,
the Brother from the Kingdom Hall says and Brother Hope, Sister Dell and me
are silent wanting only what's right outside.
Wanting only this world.
soon
When the phone rings in my grandmother's kitchen, we run from wherever we
are, jumping from the front porch swing climbing out of the mud-filled ditch
out back, running quick from the picked-clean garden- but
my brother, Hope, is the fastest, picking up the phone, pressing it hard
against his ear as though my mother's voice just that much closer means my
mother is closer to us. We jump around him: Let me speak! until my
grandmother comes through the screen door puts down the basket of laundry,
cold and dry from the line
takes the phone from my brother, shushes us,
shoos us,
promises us
a moment with our mother soon.
how i learn the days of the week
Monday night is Bible study with a Brother and Sister from the Kingdom Hall.
Tuesday night is Bible study at the Kingdom Hall.
Wednesday night is laundry night-the clothes blowing clean on the line above
my grandfather's garden. When no one is looking, we run through the sheets,
breathe in all the wonderful smells the air
adds to them.
Thursday night is Ministry School. One day, we will grow up to preach
God's word, take it out
into the world
and maybe we'll save some people.
Friday night, we're free as anything, Hope and Dell's bikes skidding along Hall
Street, my knees bumping hard against the handlebars of my red threewheeler.
One more year maybe Dell's bike will be mine.
Saturday we're up early: The Watchtower and Awake!
in our hands, we walk like sleepy soldiers through Nicholtown, ringing bells,
knocking on doors, spreading the good news
of something better coming. Sometimes, the people listen.
Sometimes, they slam their doors or don't open them at all. Or look sadly down
at me ribboned and starched, my face clean and shining with oil, my words
earnest as anything: Good morning, I'm Sister Jacqueline and I'm here
to bring you some good news today.
Sometimes they give me a dime but won't take my Watchtower and Awake!
Sunday it's Watchtower study at the Kingdom Hall, two hours
of sitting and sitting and sitting.
Then Monday comes and the week starts all over again.
ribbons
They are pale blue or pink or white.
They are neatly ironed each Saturday night.
Come Sunday morning, they are tied to the braids hanging down past our ears.
We wear ribbons every day except Saturday when we wash them by hand, Dell
and I side by side at the kitchen sink, rubbing them with Ivory soap then
rinsing them beneath cool water.
Each of us
dreaming of the day our grandmother says You're too old for ribbons.
But it feels like that day will never come.
When we hang them on the line to dry, we hope they'll blow away in the night
breeze but they don't. Come morning, they're right where we left them
gently moving in the cool air, eager to anchor us to childhood.
two gods. two worlds
It's barely morning and we're already awake, my grandmother in the kitchen
ironing our Sunday clothes.
I can hear Daddy coughing in his bed, a cough like he'll never catch his breath.
The sound catches in my chest as I'm pulling my dress over my head. Hold
my own breath until the coughing stops. Still, I hear him pad through the
living room hear the squeak of the front screen door and know, he's made it
to the porch swing, to smoke a cigarette.
My grandfather doesn't believe in a God that won't let him smoke
or have a cold beer on a Friday night a God that tells us all
the world is ending so that Y'all walk through this world
afraid as cats.
Your God is not my God, he says.
His cough moves through the air back into our room where the light is almost
blue, the white winter sun painting it.
I wish the coughing would stop. I wish he would put on Sunday clothes, take my
hand, walk with us
down the road.
Jehovah's Witnesses believe that everyone who doesn't follow God's word will
be destroyed in a great battle called Armageddon. And when the battle is
done there will be a fresh new world a nicer more peaceful world.
But I want the world where my daddy is and don't know why
anybody's God would make me
have to choose.
what god knows
We pray for my grandfather
ask God to spare him even though he's a nonbeliever. We ask that Jehovah look
into his heart, see
the goodness there.
But my grandfather says he doesn't need our prayers.
I work hard, he says. I treat people like I want
to be treated.
God sees this. God knows.
At the end of the day
he lights a cigarette, unlaces
his dusty brogans. Stretches his legs.
God sees my good, he says.
Do all the preaching and praying you want
but no need to do it for me.
new playmates
Beautiful brown dolls come from New York City, fancy stores my mother has
walked into. She writes of elevators, train stations, buildings so high, they
hurt the neck to see.
She writes of places with beautiful names Coney Island, Harlem, Brownsville,
Bear Mountain.
She tells us she's seen the ocean, how the water keeps going long after the eyes
can't see it anymore promises a whole other country on the other side.
She tells us the toy stores are filled with dolls
of every size and color there's a barbershop and a hair salon everywhere
you look and a friend of Aunt Kay's saw Lena Horne just walking down the
street.
But only the dolls are real to us.
Their black hair in stiff curls down over their shoulders,
their pink dresses made of crinoline and satin.
Their dark arms unbending.
Still
we hug their hard plastic close and imagine they're calling us Mama
imagine they need us near.
Imagine the letters from our own mother- Coming to get you soon-
are ones we're writing to them.
We will never leave you, we whisper.
They stare back at us,
blank-eyed and beautiful
silent and still.
down the road
Be careful when you play with him,
my grandmother warns us about the boy with the hole in his heart.
Don't make him run too fast. Or cry.
When he taps on our back door, we come out sit quietly with him on the back
stairs.
He doesn't talk much, this boy with the hole in his heart
but when he does, it's to ask us about our mother in New York City.
Is she afraid there?
Did she ever meet a movie star?
Do the buildings really
go on and on?
One day, he says-so soft, my brother, sister and I lean in to hear-I'm gonna
go to New York City.
Then he looks off, toward Cora's house down the road.
That's south, my sister says. New York's the other way.
god's promise
It is nearly Christmastime.
On the radio, a man with a soft deep voice is singing telling us to have ourselves
a merry little . . .
Nicholtown windows are filled with Christmas trees.
Coraandhersisters brag about what they are getting, dolls and skates and swing
sets. In the backyard our own swing set is silent- a thin layer of snow
covering it.
When we are made to stay inside on Sunday afternoons,
Coraandhersisters descend upon it, take the swings up high,
stick their tongues out at us
as we stare from behind our glassed-in screen door.
Let them play, for heaven's sake, my grandmother says, when we complain
about them tearing it apart.
Your hearts are bigger than that!
But our hearts aren't bigger than that.
Our hearts are tiny and mad.
If our hearts were hands, they'd hit.
If our hearts were feet, they'd surely kick somebody!
the other infinity
We are the chosen people, our grandmother tells us.
Everything we do is a part
of God's plan. Every breath you breathe is the gift God
is giving you. Everything we own . . .
Daddy gave us the swings, my sister tells her. Not God.
My grandmother's words come slowly meaning this lesson is an important one.
With the money he earned by working at a job God
gave him a body strong enough to work with.
Outside, our swing set is empty finally, Coraandhersisters now gone.
Hope, Dell and I are silent.
So much we don't yet understand.
So much we don't yet believe.
But we know this:
Monday, Tuesday, Thursday,
Saturday and Sunday are reserved for God's work. We are put here to do it and
we are expected to do it well.
What is promised to us in return is eternity.
It's the same, my sister says, or maybe even better than
infinity.
The empty swing set reminds us of this- that what is bad won't be bad forever,
and what is good can sometimes last a long, long time.
Even Coraandhersisters can only bother us for a little while before they get
called home to supper.
sometimes, no words are needed
Deep winter and the night air is cold. So still, it feels like the world goes on
forever in the darkness until you look up and the earth stops in a ceiling of
stars. My head against my grandfather's arm, a blanket around us as we sit on
the front porch swing.
Its whine like a song.
You don't need words on a night like this. Just the warmth of your grandfather's
arm. Just the silent promise that the world as we know it will always be here.
the letter
The letter comes on a Saturday morning, my sister opens it. My mother's
handwriting is easy, my sister says. She doesn't write in script.
She writes so we can understand her.
And then she reads my mother's letter slowly while Hope and I sit at the kitchen
table, cheese grits near gone, scrambled eggs leaving yellow dots
in our bowls. My grandmother's beloved biscuits forgotten.
She's coming for us, my sister says and reads the part where my mother tells her
the plan.
We're really leaving Greenville, my sister says and Hope sits up straighter and
smiles. But then the smile is gone.
How can we have both places?
How can we leave
all that we've known-
me on Daddy's lap in the early evening, listening to Hope and Dell tell stories
about their lives at the small school a mile down the road.
I will be five one day and the Nicholtown school is a mystery
I'm just about to solve.
And what about the fireflies and ditches?
And what about the nights when we all climb into our grandparents' bed and
they move apart, making room for us in the middle.
And maybe that's when my sister reads the part I don't hear:
a baby coming. Another one. A brother or sister.
Still in her belly but coming soon.
She's coming to get us, my sister says again, looking around
our big yellow kitchen. Then running her hand over the hardwood table
as though she's already gone and trying to remember this.
one morning, late winter
Then one morning my grandfather is too sick to walk the half mile to the bus
that takes him to work.
He stays in bed for the whole day waking only to cough and cough
and cough.
I walk slow around him fluffing his pillows, pressing cool cloths over his
forehead telling him the stories that come to me again and again.
This I can do-find him another place to be when this world is choking him.
Tell me a story, he says.
And I do.
new york baby
When my mother returns,
I will no longer be her baby girl.
I am sitting on my grandmother's lap when she tells me this,
already so tall my legs dangle far down, the tips of my toes touching the porch
mat. My head rests on her shoulder now where once, it came only to her
collarbone. She smells the way she always does, of Pine-Sol and cotton,
Dixie Peach hair grease and something warm and powdery.
I want to know whose baby girl I'll be when my mother's new baby comes, born
where the sidewalks sparkle and me just a regular girl.
I didn't know how much I loved being everyone's baby girl
until now when my life as baby girl is nearly over.
leaving greenville
My mother arrives in the middle of the night, and sleepily, we pile into her arms
and hold tight.
Her kiss on the top of my head reminds me of all that I love.
Mostly her.
It is late winter but my grandmother keeps the window in our room slightly open
so that the cold fresh air can move over us as we sleep. Two thick quilts and
the three of us side by side by side.
This is all we know now-
Cold pine breezes, my grandmother's quilts, the heat of the wood-burning stove,
the sweet slow voices of the people around us, red dust wafting, then settling
as though it's said all that it needs to say.
My mother tucks us back into our bed whispering, We have a home up North
now.
I am too sleepy to tell her that Greenville is home.
That even in the wintertime, the crickets sing us to sleep.
And tomorrow morning, you'll get to meet
your new baby brother.
But I am already mostly asleep again, two arms wrapped tight
around my mama's hand.
roman
His name is as strange as he is, this new baby brother so pale and quiet and
wide-eyed. He sucks his fist, taking in all of us without blinking.
Another boy, Hope says,
now it's even-steven around here.
But I don't like the new baby of the family.
I want to send it back to wherever babies live before they get here. When I pinch
him, a red mark stays behind, and his cry is high and tinny a sound that hurts
my ears.
That's what you get, my sister says.
His crying is him fighting you back.
Then she picks him up, holds him close, tells him softly everything's all right,
everything's always going to be all right until Roman gets quiet,
his wide black eyes looking only at Dell as if
he believes her.

new york city
Maybe it's another New York City the southerners talk about. Maybe that's
where there is money falling from the sky, diamonds speckling
the sidewalks.
Here there is only gray rock, cold and treeless as a bad dream. Who could love
this place-where no pine trees grow, no porch swing moves
with the weight of
your grandmother.
This place is a Greyhound bus humming through the night then letting out a
deep breath inside a place called Port Authority. This place is a driver yelling,
New York City, last stop.
Everybody off.
This place is loud and strange and nowhere I'm ever going to call home.
brooklyn, new york
We did not stay in the small apartment my mother found on Bristol Street,
Brownsville, Brooklyn, USA.
We did not stay because the dim bulb that hung from a chain swung back and
forth when our upstairs neighbors walked across their floor, casting shadows
that made my brother cry
and suck hard on his middle fingers.
We did not stay because the building was big and old and when the bathroom
ceiling fell into the bathtub, my mother said, I am not Henny Penny and that
is not the sky!
So she called Aunt Kay and her boyfriend, Bernie, they borrowed a truck and
helped us pack, bundled us up in winter coats turned off that swinging light
and got us out of there!
herzl street
So we moved to Herzl Street where Aunt Kay and Bernie lived upstairs.
And Peaches from Greenville lived below us.
And on Saturday nights more people from Greenville came by
sitting and running their mouths
while the pots on the stove bubbled with collards and sizzled with chicken and
corn bread baked up brown inside Kay's big black oven.
And the people from Greenville brought people from Spartanburg and
Charleston
and all of them talked
like our grandparents talked and ate what we ate
so they were red dirt and pine trees they were fireflies in jelly jars and lemonchiffon
ice cream cones.
They were laughter on hot city nights hot milk on cold city mornings, good food
and good times
fancy dancing and soul music.
They were family.
the johnny pump
Some days we miss
the way the red dirt lifted up and landed against our bare feet. Here the sidewalks
burn hot all summer long.
Here we wear shoes. Broken bottles don't always get swept up right away.
But our block has three johnny pumps and a guy with a wrench
to turn them on. On the days when the heat stops your breath, he comes up the
block pulling it out of his pocket. Then the johnny pump is blasting cool
water everywhere and us and other kids running through it, refreshed and
laughing.
Even the grown-ups come out sometimes.
Once, I saw my
never-ever-barefoot-outside-in-the-city mother take off her sandals,
stand at the curb
and let the cool water run over her feet.
She was looking up at the tiny piece of sky.
And she was smiling.
genetics
My mother has a gap between her two front teeth. So does Daddy Gunnar.
Each child in this family has the same space connecting us.
Our baby brother, Roman, was born pale as dust.
His soft brown curls and eyelashes stop people on the street.
Whose angel child is this? they want to know.
When I say, My brother, the people wear doubt
thick as a cape
until we smile
and the cape falls.
caroline but
we called her aunt kay,
some memories
Aunt Kay at the top of the stairs, her arms open, her smile wide
and us running to her.
Aunt Kay dressed up on a Friday night smelling of perfume, her boyfriend,
Bernie, her friend Peaches.
Aunt Kay in the kitchen with Peaches and Bernie passing a blue-and-white box
of Argo starch back and forth, the hard white chunks of it, disappearing into
their mouths like candy, the slow chew and swallow.
Aunt Kay and Mama and Peaches, in tight skirts singing in a band.
Aunt Kay braiding my hair.
Aunt Kay running up the stairs to her own apartment and me running behind her.
Aunt Kay laughing.
Aunt Kay hugging me.
Then a fall.
A crowd.
An ambulance.
My mother's tears.
A funeral.
And here, my Aunt Kay memories end.
moving again
After the falling
the stairs were all wrong to us.
Some days I head up there, my mother said, forgetting that Kay is gone.
After the falling
Bernie and Peaches
packed their bags, moved out to Far Rockaway, telling my mother how much
Kay loved the ocean.
After the falling
we took the A train
to their new apartment, played on the beach till the sun went down, Mama quiet
on a blanket looking out at the water.
Kay was her big sister, only ten months older.
Everyone always thought they were twins so that's what they said they were.
Couldn't look at one of us, my mother said, without seeing the other.
After the falling
the hallway smelled
like Kay's perfume
whenever it rained
so we moved again
to the second floor of a pink house on Madison Street.
Out front there was a five-foot sculpture made from gray rock,
ivory and sand. A small fountain sent water cascading over statues
of Mary, Joseph and Jesus.
People stopped in front of the house, crossed themselves, mouthed a silent
prayer then moved on.
This house is protected, the landlord told my mother.
The saints keep us safe.
This house is protected, my mother whispered to us.
By the Saint of Ugly Sculpture.
After the falling
sometimes I would see my mother smiling at that sculpture. And in her smile,
there was Aunt Kay's smile, the two of them having a secret sister laugh, the
two of them together again.
composition notebook
And somehow, one day, it's just there speckled black-and-white, the paper
inside smelling like something I could fall right into, live there-inside those
clean white pages.
I don't know how my first composition notebook ended up in my hands, long
before I could really write someone must have known that this was all I
needed.
Hard not to smile as I held it, felt the breeze as I fanned the pages.
My sister thought my standing there smiling was crazy
didn't understand how the smell and feel and sight of bright white paper
could bring me so much joy.
And why does she need a notebook? She can't even write!
For days and days, I could only sniff the pages, hold the notebook close listen to
the sound the papers made.
Nothing in the world is like this- a bright white page with pale blue lines. The
smell of a newly sharpened pencil the soft hush of it
moving finally
one day
into letters.
And even though she's smarter than anything, this is something
my sister can't even begin to understand.
on paper
The first time I write my full name Jacqueline Amanda Woodson
without anybody's help on a clean white page in my composition notebook,
I know if I wanted to
I could write anything.
Letters becoming words, words gathering meaning, becoming thoughts outside
my head becoming sentences
written by
Jacqueline Amanda Woodson
saturday morning
Some days in this new place there is only a box of pancake mix an egg, and
faucet water, the hiss of those together
against a black cast-iron pan, the pancakes sticking to it syrupless but edible and
us complaining about it wishing like anything we were back in Greenville,
where there was always something good to eat. We remember
the collards growing
down south, the melons, fresh picked and dripping with a sweetness New York
can never know.
We eat without complaining or whining or asking our mother when there will be
syrup, butter, milk . . .
We remember Greenville without her, count our blessings in silence and chew.
first grade
My hand inside my sister's hand, we walk the two blocks to P.S. 106- I am six
years old and
my sister tells me our school was once a castle.
I believe her. The school stretches for a full city block.
Inside
marble stairs wind their way to classrooms filled with dark wood desks
nailed down to dark wood floors polished to a high and beautiful shine.
I am in love with everything around me, the dotted white lines moving across
my teacher's blackboard, the smell of chalk, the flag jutting out from the wall
and slowly swaying above me.
There is nothing more beautiful than P.S. 106.
Nothing more perfect than my first-grade classroom.
No one more kind than Ms. Feidler, who meets me at the door each morning,
takes my hand from my sister's, smiles down and says, Now that Jacqueline is
here, the day can finally begin.
And I believe her.
Yes, I truly believe her.
another kingdom hall
Because my grandmother calls and asks if we're spreading Jehovah's word,
because my mother promises my grandmother she'll raise us right in the eyes
of God, she finds a Kingdom Hall on Bushwick Avenue so we can keep our
Jehovah's Witness ways.
Every Sunday, we put on our Kingdom Hall clothes pull out our Kingdom Hall
satchels, filled with our Kingdom Hall books and walk the seven blocks
to the Kingdom Hall.
This is what reminds us of Greenville, the Saturday-night pressing of satin
ribbons, Hope struggling with the knot in his tie, our hair oiled and pulled
back into braids, our mother's hands less sure
than our grandmother's, the parts crooked, the braids coming undone. And now,
Dell and I are left to iron our own dresses.
My hands,
my mother says,
as she stands at the sink, holding a crying Roman with one hand,
her other holding a bottle of milk under hot running water,
are full.
My mother drops us off at the Kingdom Hall door, watches us walk
down the aisle to where Brothers and Sisters are waiting
to help us turn the pages of our Bibles, lean over to share their songbooks with
us, press Life Savers into our waiting hands . . .
Then our mother is gone, back home or to a park bench,
where she'll sit and read until the meeting is over.
She has a full-time job now. Sunday, she says, is her day of rest.
flag
When the kids in my class ask why I am not allowed to pledge to the flag I tell
them It's against my religion but don't say, I am in the world but not of the
world. This, they would not understand.
Even though my mother's not a Jehovah's Witness, she makes us follow their
rules and leave the classroom when the pledge is being said.
Every morning, I walk out with Gina and Alina the two other Witnesses in my
class.
Sometimes, Gina says,
Maybe we should pray for the kids inside
who don't know that God said
“No other idols before me." That our God
is a jealous God.
Gina is the true believer. Her Bible open during reading time. But Alina and I
walk through our roles as Witnesses as though this is the part we've been
given in a play
and once offstage, we run free, sing “America the Beautiful" and “The Star-
Spangled Banner"
far away from our families-knowing every word.
Alina and I want
more than anything to walk back into our classroom press our hands against our
hearts. Say, “I pledge allegiance . . ." loud without our jealous God looking
down on us.
Without our parents finding out.
Without our mothers' voices
in our heads saying, You are different.
Chosen.
Good.
When the pledge is over, we walk single file back into the classroom, take our
separate seats Alina and I far away from Gina. But Gina always looks back at
us-as if to say, I'm watching you. As if to say, I know.
because we're witnesses
No Halloween.
No Christmas.
No birthdays.
Even when
other kids laugh as we leave the classroom just as the birthday cupcakes arrive
we pretend we do not see the chocolate frosting, pretend we do not want to
press our fingertips against each colorful sprinkle and lift them, one by sweet
one to our mouths.
No voting.
No fighting.
No cursing.
No wars.
We will never go to war.
We will never taste the sweetness of a classroom birthday cupcake We will
never taste the bitterness of a battle.
brooklyn rain
The rain here is different than the way it rains in Greenville. No sweet smell of
honeysuckle.
No soft squish of pine. No slip and slide through grass.
Just Mama saying, Stay inside today. It's raining,
and me at the window. Nothing to do but watch
the gray sidewalk grow darker,
watch
the drops slide down the glass pane, watch
people below me move fast, heads bent.
Already there are stories
in my head. Already color and sound and words.
Already I'm
drawing circles on the glass, humming myself someplace far away from here.
Down south, there was always someplace else to go you could step out into the
rain and Grandma would let you
lift your head and stick out your tongue be happy.
Down south already feels like a long time ago but the stories in my head
take me back there, set me down in Daddy's garden where the sun is always
shining.
another way
While our friends are watching TV or playing outside, we are in our house,
knowing that begging our mother to turn the television on is useless, begging
her for ten minutes outside will only mean her saying, No. Saying,
You can run wild with your friends anytime. Today
I want you to find another way to play.
And then one day my mother
comes home with two shopping bags filled with board games-Monopoly,
checkers, chess, Ants in the Pants, Sorry, Trouble, just about every game
we've ever seen in the commercials between
our Saturday morning cartoons.
So many games, we don't know where to begin playing, so we let Roman
choose.
And he chooses Trouble
because he likes the sound the die makes when it pops inside
its plastic bubble. And for days and days, it is Christmas in November,
games to play when our homework is done, Monopoly money to count
and checkers to slam down on boards, ants to flip into blue plastic pants,
chess pieces to practice moving until we understand their power
and when we don't, Roman and I argue that there's another way to play called
Our Way. But Hope and Dell tell us that we're too immature to even begin to
understand then bend over the chessboard in silence, each becoming the next
chess champ of the house, depending on the day and the way the game is
played.
Sometimes, Roman and I leave Hope and Dell alone go to another corner of the
room and become what the others call us-the two youngest,
playing games we know the rules to tic-tac-toe and checkers,
hangman and connect the dots
but mostly, we lean over their shoulders as quietly as we can, watching waiting
wanting to understand
how to play another way.
gifted
Everyone knows my sister is brilliant. The letters come home folded neatly
inside official-looking envelopes that my sister proudly hands over to my
mother.
Odella has achieved
Odella has excelled at Odella has been recommended to Odella's outstanding
performance in She is gifted
we are told.
And I imagine presents surrounding her.
I am not gifted. When I read, the words twist twirl across the page.
When they settle, it is too late.
The class has already moved on.
I want to catch words one day. I want to hold them then blow gently,
watch them float
right out of my hands.
sometimes
There is only one other house on our block where a father doesn't live. When
somebody asks why, the boy says, He died.
The girl looks off, down the block, her thumb slowly rising to her mouth. The
boy says, I was a baby. Says, She doesn't remember him
and points to his silent sister.
Sometimes, I lie about my father.
He died, I say, in a car wreck or He fell off a roof or maybe He's coming soon.
Next week and
next week and
next week . . . but
if my sister's nearby
she shakes her head. Says,
She's making up stories again.
Says,
We don't have a father anymore.
Says,
Our grandfather's our father now.
Says,
Sometimes, that's the way things happen.
uncle robert
Uncle Robert has moved to New York City!
I hear him taking the stairs
two at a time and then
he is at our door, knocking loud until our mother
opens it, curlers in her hair, robe pulled closed, whispering, It's almost
midnight, don't you wake my children!
But we are already awake, all four of us, smiling
and jumping around my uncle: What'd you bring me?
Our mama shushes us, says,
It's too late for presents and the like.
But we want presents and the like.
And she, too, is smiling now, happy to see her
baby brother who lives all the way over in Far Rockaway where the ocean is
right there if you look out your window.
Robert opens his hand to reveal a pair of silver earrings, says to my sister, This
is a gift for how smart you are.
I want
to be smart like Dell, I want
someone to hand me silver and gold
just because my brain clicks into thinking whenever it needs to but
I am not smart like Dell so I watch her press
the silver moons into her ears I say, I know a girl ten times smarter than her.
She gets
diamonds every time she gets a hundred on a test.
And Robert looks at me, his dark eyes smiling, asks, Is that something you
made up? Or something real?
In my own head,
it's real as anything.
In my head
all kinds of people are doing all kinds of things.
I want to tell him this, that
the world we're living in right here in Bushwick isn't the only place. But now
my brothers are asking, What'd you bring me, and my uncle is pulling gifts
from his pockets, from his leather briefcase, from inside his socks.
He hands my mother a record, a small 45-James Brown,
who none of us like because he screams when he sings. But my mother
puts it on the record player, turned way down low
and then even us kids are dancing around- Robert showing us the steps he
learned
at the Far Rockaway parties. His feet are magic and we all try to slide across
the floor like he does, our own feet, again and again,
betraying us.
Teach us, Robert! we keep saying. Teach us!
wishes
When he takes us to the park, Uncle Robert tells us, If you catch a dandelion
puff, you can make a wish.
Anything you want will come true, he says as we chase the feathery wishes
around swings, beneath sliding boards,
until we can hold them in our hands, close our eyes tight, whisper our dream
then set it floating out into the universe hoping our uncle is telling the truth,
hoping each thing we wish for
will one day come true.
believing
The stories start like this- Jack and Jill went up a hill, my uncle sings.
I went up a hill yesterday, I say.
What hill?
In the park.
What park?
Halsey Park.
Who was with you?
Nobody.
But you're not allowed to go to the park without anyone.
I just did.
Maybe you dreamed it, my uncle says.
No, I really went.
And my uncle likes the stories I'm making up.
. . . Along came a spider and sat down beside her.
I got bit by a spider, I say.
When?
The other day.
Where?
Right on my foot.
Show us.
It's gone now.
But my mother accuses me of lying.
If you lie, she says, one day you'll steal.
I won't steal.
It's hard to understand how one leads to the other, how stories could ever make
us criminals.
It's hard to understand the way my brain works-so different from everybody
around me.
How each new story
I'm told becomes a thing that happens,
in some other way
to me . . . !
Keep making up stories, my uncle says.
You're lying, my mother says.
Maybe the truth is somewhere in between all that I'm told
and memory.
off-key
We start each meeting at Kingdom Hall with a song and a prayer
but we're always late,
walking in when the pink songbooks are already open, looking over shoulders,
asking Brothers and Sisters to help us find our place.
If it's a song I like, I sing loud until my sister shushes me with a finger to her
mouth.
My whole family knows I can't sing. My voice, my sister says, is just left of the
key. Just right of the tune.
But I sing anyway, whenever I can.
Even the boring Witness songs sound good to me,
the words telling us how God wants us to behave, what he wants us to do,
Be glad you nations with his people! Go preach
from door to door!
The good news of Jehovah's kingdom-
Proclaim from shore to shore!
It's the music around the words that I hear in my head, even though
everyone swears I can't hear it.
Strange that they don't hear
what I hear.
Strange that it sounds so right to me.
eve and the snake
The Sunday sermons are given by men.
Women aren't allowed to get onstage like this, standing alone to tell God's story.
I don't understand why but I listen anyway: On the first day, God made the
heavens and the earth
and He looked at it, and it was good.
It's a long story. It's a good story.
Adam and Eve got made,
a snake appeared in a tree. A talking snake.
Then Eve had to make a choice-the apple the snake
wanted her to eat looked so good-just one bite. But it was the only apple
in a kingdom full of apples that God had said Don't touch!
It's the best apple in all the world, the snake said.
Go ahead and taste it. God won't care.
But we know the ending-in our heads, we scream, Don't do it, Eve! That's the
Devil inside that snake!
He's tricking you!
But Eve took a bite. And so here we are, sitting in a Kingdom Hall
on a beautiful Sunday afternoon
hoping that God sees it in His heart to know it wasn't our fault. Give us another
chance send that snake back and we promise we'll say no this time!
our father, fading away
In all our moving, we've forgotten our family in Ohio, forgotten our father's
voice, the slow drawl of his words,
the way he and his brother David made jokes that weren't funny
and laughed as though they were.
We forget the color of his skin-was it dark brown like mine or lighter like
Dell's?
Did he have Hope and Dell's loose curls or my tighter, kinkier hair?
Was his voice deep or high?
Was he a hugger like Grandma Georgiana holding us like she never planned to
let go or did he hug hard and fast like Mama, planting her warm lips to our
foreheads where the kiss lingered
long after
she said I love you, pulled her sweater on and left for work each morning.
In Brooklyn there are no more calls from Ohio.
No more calls from our father or Grandpa Hope or Grandma Grace
or David or Anne or Ada or Alicia.
It is as if each family has disappeared from the other.
Soon, someone who knows someone in Ohio
who knows the Woodsons tells my mother that Grandpa Hope has died.
At dinner that evening, our mother gives us the news but we keep eating because
we hadn't known he was still alive.
And for a moment, I think about Jack . . . our father.
But then
quickly as it comes
the thought moves on.
Out of sight, out of mind, my brother says.
But only a part of me believes this is true.
halfway home #2
For a long time, there is only one tree on our block.
And though it still feels
strange to be so far away from soft dirt beneath bare feet
the ground is firm here and the one tree blooms wide enough to shade four
buildings.
The city is settling around me, my words
come fast now when I speak, the soft curl of the South on my tongue is near
gone.
Who are these city children? My grandmother laughs,
her own voice sad and far away on the phone. But it is
a long-distance call from Greenville to Brooklyn, too much money and not
enough time to explain that New York City is gray rock and quick-moving
cars.
That the traffic lights change fast and my sister must hold tight to my hand
as we cross to where a small man singing Piragua! Piragua!
sells shaved ices from a white cart filled with bottles and bottles of fruit-flavored
syrup colored red and purple, orange and blue.
That our mouths water in the hot sun as we hand him our quarters then wait
patiently as he pours
the syrup over the ice, hands it to us in paper cones.
We'll be coming home soon, Grandma
each of us promises.
We love you.
And when she says, I love you, too
the South is so heavy in her mouth my eyes fill up with the missing of
everything and everyone
I've ever known.
the paint eater
In the night in the corner of the bedroom the four of us share,
comes a pick, pick, picking of plaster paint gone come morning.
My younger brother, Roman, can't explain why paint melting on his tongue
feels good.
Still, he eats the paint and plaster until a white hole grows where pale green
paint used to be.
And too late we catch him, his fingers in his mouth, his lips covered with dust.
chemistry
When Hope speaks, it's always about comic books and superheroes
until my mother tells him he has to talk about something else.
And then it's science. He wants to know everything
about rockets and medicine and the galaxy.
He wants to know where the sky ends and how, what does it feel like when
gravity's gone and what is the food men eat
on the moon. His questions come so fast and so often that we forget how quiet
he once was until my mother
buys him a chemistry set.
And then for hours after school each day he makes potions, mixing chemicals
that stink up the house, causing sparks to fly from shaved bits of iron,
puffs of smoke to pop from strange-colored liquids.
We are fascinated by him, goggled and bent
over the stove a clamped test tube protruding from his gloved hand.
On the days when our mother says she doesn't want him smelling up the house
with his potions, he takes his trains apart, studies each tiny piece, then slowly
puts them together again.
We don't know what it is he's looking for as he searches the insides of things,
studies the way things change. Each whispered Wow
from him makes me think that he with his searching-and Dell with her reading
and even Roman with his trying to eat to the other side of our walls-is
looking for something. Something way past Brooklyn.
Something
out
there.
baby in the house
And then one day, Roman won't get up, sun coming in bright
through the bedroom window, the rest of us dressed and ready to go outside.
No laughter-just tears when we hold him.
More crying when we put him down.
Won't eat and even my mother can't help him.
When she takes him to the hospital, she comes back alone.
And for many days after that, there is no baby in our house and I am finally the
baby girl again, wishing I wasn't. Wishing there wasn't so much quiet where
my brother's laugh used to be, wishing the true baby in our house was home.
going home again
July comes and Robert takes us on the night train back to South Carolina. We
kiss our baby brother good-bye in his hospital bed where he reaches out, cries
to come with us.
His words are weak as water, no more than a whisper with so much air around
them.
I'm coming too, he says.
But he isn't coming.
Not this time.
My mother says there is lead in his blood from the paint he finds a way to pick
and eat off our bedroom wall
every time our backs are turned.
Small holes grow, like white stars against the green paint, covered again and
again by our mother. But still, he finds a way.
Each of us hugs him, promises to bring him candy and toys.
Promises we won't have fun down south without him.
Each of us leans in
for our mother's kiss on our forehead, her warm lips, already a memory that each
of us carries home.
home again to hall street
My grandmother's kitchen is the same big and yellow and smelling of the pound
cake she's made to welcome us back.
And now in the late afternoon, she is standing at the sink, tearing collards
beneath cool running water, while the crows caw outside, and the sun sinks
slow into red and gold When Hope lets the screen door slam, she fusses,
Boy, don't you slam my door again! and my brother says, I'm sorry.
Just like always.
Soon, there'll be lemonade on the porch, the swing whining the same early
evening song it always sings
my brother and sister with the checker set between them me next to my
grandfather, falling asleep against his thin shoulder.
And it's not even strange that it feels the way
it's always felt like the place we belong to.
Like home.
mrs. hughes's house
In Greenville, my grandfather is too sick to work anymore, so my grandmother
has a full-time job.
Now we spend every day from July until the middle of August at Mrs. Hughes's
Nursery and Day School.
Each morning, we walk the long dusty road to Mrs. Hughes's house-large,
white stone, with a yard circling and chickens pecking at our feet.
Beyond the yard there's collards and corn growing a scarecrow, black snakes,
and whip-poor-wills.
She is a big woman, tall, yellow-skinned and thick
as a wall.
I hold tight to my grandmother's hand. Maybe
I am crying.
My grandmother drops us off and the other kids circle around us. Laughing at
our hair, our clothes, the names our parents have given us,
our city way of talking-too fast, too many words to hear at once
too many big words coming out of my sister's mouth.
I am always the first to cry. A gentle slap on the side of my head, a secret pinch,
girls circling around me singing, Who stole the cookie
from the cookie jar and pointing, as though the song is true, at me.
My sister's tears are slow to come. But when they do, it isn't sadness.
It's something different that sends her swinging
her fists when the others yank her braids until the satin, newly ironed ribbons
belong to them, hidden away in the deep pockets of their dresses, tucked into
their sagging stockings, buried inside their silver lunch pails.
Hope is silent-his name, they say, belongs to a girl, his ears, they laugh
stick out too far from his head.
Our feet are beginning to belong in two different worlds-Greenville and New
York. We don't know how to come home
and leave
home
behind us.
how to listen #4
Kids are mean, Dell says.
Just turn away. Pretend we
know better than that.
field service
Saturday morning's the hardest day for us now.
For three hours we move through
the streets of Nicholtown,
knocking on strangers' doors, hoping to convert them into Sisters and Brothers
and children of God.
This summer I am allowed to knock on my first door alone. An old woman
answers, smiles kindly at me.
What a special child you are, she says.
Sky-blue ribbons in my hair, my Watchtower held tight in my white-gloved
hand,
the blue linen dress a friend of my grandmother's has made for me stopping just
above my knees.
My name is Jacqueline Woodson, I nearly whisper, my throat suddenly dry
voice near gone.
I'm here to bring you some good news today . . .
Well how much does your good news cost, the woman
wants to know.
A dime.
She shakes her head sadly, closes her door a moment to search beneath a trunk
where she hopes she's dropped a coin or two.
But when she comes back, there are no coins in her hand.
Oh I'd love to read that magazine, she says.
I just don't have money.
And for many days my heart hurts with the sadness that such a nice woman will
not be a part of God's
new world.
It isn't fair, I say to my grandmother when so many days have passed.
I want to go back. I want to give her something
for free.
But we're done now with that strip of Nicholtown.
Next Saturday, we'll be somewhere else.
Another Witness will go there, my grandmother promises.
By and by, she says, that woman will find her way.
sunday afternoon on the front porch
Across the road,
Miss Bell has tied a blue-checked sunbonnet beneath her chin, lifts her head
from her bed of azaleas and waves to my grandmother.
I am sitting beside her on the front porch swing, Hope and Dell leaning back
against the wood beam at the top of the front porch stairs. It is as though we
have always been in this position, the front porch swing moving gently back
and forth, the sun warm on our faces, the day only halfway over.
I see your grands are back for the summer,
Miss Bell says. Getting big, too.
It is Sunday afternoon.
Out back, my grandfather pulls weeds from his garden, digs softly into the rich
earth to add new melon seeds.
Wondering if this time, they'll grow. All this he does from a small chair, a
cane beside him.
He moves as if underwater, coughs
hard and long into a handkerchief, calls out for Hope when he needs the chair
moved, sees me watching, and shakes his head. I'm catching you worrying,
he says.
Too young for that. So just cut it out now, you hear?
His voice
so strong and clear today, I can't help smiling.
Soon I'll rise from the porch,
change out of my Kingdom Hall clothes into a pair of shorts and a cotton blouse
trade my patent-leather Mary Janes for bare feet and join my grandfather in
the garden.
What took you so long, he'll say. I was about to turn
this earth around without you.
Soon, it'll be near evening and Daddy and I will walk slow
back into the house where I'll pull the Epsom salt from the shelf
fill the dishpan with warm water, massage his swelling hands.
But for now, I sit listening to Nicholtown settle around me,
pray that one day Roman will be well enough to know this moment.
Pray that we will always have this-the front porch, my grandfather in the
garden,
a woman in a blue-checked sunbonnet moving through azaleas . . .
Pretty children, Miss Bell says.
But God don't make them no other kinda way.
home then home again
Too fast, our summer in Greenville is ending.
Already, the phone calls from my mother are filled with plans for coming home.
We miss
our little's brother's laughter, the way he runs to us at the end of the school day
as if we've been gone forever. The way his small hands curl around ours
when we watch TV. Holding tight through the scary parts, until we tell him
Scooby-Doo will save the day, Bugs Bunny will get away,
Underdog will arrive before the train hits Sweet Polly Purebred.
We drag our feet below our swings, our arms wrapped lazily around the metal
links no longer fascinated by the newness of the set, the way we climbed all
over the slide, pumped our legs hard-toward heaven until the swing set
shook with the weight of us lifting it from the ground.
Next summer, my grandfather said, I'll cement it down.
But in the meantime
you all swing low.
Our suitcases sit at the foot of our bed, open slowly filling with freshly washed
summer clothes, each blouse, each pair of shorts, each faded cotton dress
holding a story that we'll tell again and again all winter long.

family
In the books, there's always a happily ever after.
The ugly duckling grows into a swan, Pinocchio becomes a boy.
The witch gets chucked into the oven by Gretel, the Selfish Giant goes to
heaven.
Even Winnie the Pooh seems to always get his honey.
Little Red Riding Hood's grandmother is freed from the belly of the wolf.
When my sister reads to me, I wait for the moment when the story moves faster
-toward the happy ending that I know is coming.
On the bus home from Greenville, I wake to the almost happy ending, my
mother standing at the station, Roman in his stroller, his smile bright, his
arms reaching for us but we see the white hospital band like a bracelet on his
wrist. Tomorrow he will return there.
We are not all finally and safely home.
one place
For a long time, our little brother goes back and forth to the hospital, his body
weak from the lead, his brain not doing what a brain is supposed to do. We
don't understand why he's so small, has tubes coming from his arms, sleeps
and sleeps . . .
when we visit him.
But one day,
he comes home. The holes in the wall are covered over and left
unpainted, his bed pulled away from temptation,
nothing for him to peel away.
He is four now, curls long gone, his dark brown hair straight as a bone, strange
to us but our little brother, the four of us again in one place.
maria
Late August now
home from Greenville and ready for what the last of the summer brings me.
All the dreams this city holds right outside-just step through the door and walk
two doors down to where
my new best friend, Maria, lives. Every morning, I call up to her window, Come
outside
or she rings our bell, Come outside.
Her hair is crazily curling down past her back, the Spanish she speaks like a song
I am learning to sing.
Mi amiga, Maria.
Maria, my friend.
how to listen #5
What is your one dream,
my friend Maria asks me.
Your one wish come true?
tomboy
My sister, Dell, reads and reads and never learns
to jump rope or
play handball against the factory wall on the corner.
Never learns to sprint barefoot down the block to become
the fastest girl
on Madison Street.
Doesn't learn
to hide the belt or steal the bacon or kick the can . . .
But I do and because of this Tomboy becomes my new name.
My walk, my mother says, reminds her of my father.
When I move long-legged and fast away from her she remembers him.
game over
When my mother calls,
Hope Dell Jackie-inside!
the game is over.
No more reading beneath the streetlight for Dell. But for my brother and me it's
no more anything! No more steal the bacon
coco levio 1-2-3
Miss Lucy had a baby
spinning tops
double Dutch.
No more
freeze tag
hide the belt
hot peas and butter.
No more
singing contests on the stoop.
No more
ice cream truck chasing: Wait! Wait, ice cream man! My mother's gonna
give me money!
No more getting wet in the johnny pump or standing with two fisted hands out in
front of me, a dime hidden in one, chanting, Dumb school, dumb school,
which hand's it in?
When my mother calls, Hope Dell Jackie-inside!
we complain as we walk up the block in the twilight: Everyone else is allowed to
stay outside till dark.
Our friends standing in the moment- string halfway wrapped around a top,
waiting to be tagged and unfrozen, searching for words to a song, dripping
from the johnny pump, silent in the middle of Miss Lucy had a . . .
The game is over for the evening and all we can hear is our friends'
Aw . . . man!!
Bummer!
For real?! This early?!
Dang it!
Shoot. Your mama's mean!
Early birds!
Why she gotta mess up our playing like that?
Jeez. Now
the game's over!
lessons
My mother says:
When Mama tried to teach me
to make collards and potato salad
I didn't want to learn.
She opens the box of pancake mix, adds milk and egg, stirs. I watch
grateful for the food we have now-syrup waiting in the cabinet, bananas to
slice on top.
It's Saturday morning.
Five days a week, she leaves us
to work at an office back in Brownsville.
Saturday we have her to ourselves, all day long.
Me and Kay didn't want to be inside cooking.
She stirs the lumps from the batter, pours it into the buttered, hissing pan.
Wanted to be with our friends
running wild through Greenville.
There was a man with a peach tree down the road.
One day Robert climbed over that fence, filled a bucket
with peaches. Wouldn't share them with any of us but
told us where the peach tree was. And that's where we
wanted to be
sneaking peaches from that man's tree, throwing
the rotten ones
at your uncle!
Mama wanted us to learn to cook.
Ask the boys, we said. And Mama knew that wasn't fair
girls inside and boys going off to steal peaches!
So she let all of us
stay outside until suppertime.
And by then, she says, putting our breakfast on the table, it was too late.
trading places
When Maria's mother makes
arroz con habichuelas y tostones,
we trade dinners. If it's a school night, I'll run to Maria's house, a plate of my
mother's baked chicken with Kraft mac and cheese, sometimes box corn
bread,
sometimes canned string beans,
warm in my hands, ready for the first taste of Maria's mother's garlicky rice and
beans, crushed green bananas
fried and salted and warm . . .
Maria will be waiting, her own plate covered in foil.
Sometimes we sit side by side on her stoop, our traded plates in our laps.
What are you guys eating? the neighborhood kids ask but we never answer, too
busy shoveling the food we love into our mouths.
Your mother makes the best chicken, Maria says. The best
corn bread. The best everything!
Yeah, I say.
I guess my grandma taught her something after all.
writing #1
It's easier to make up stories than it is to write them down. When I speak, the
words come pouring out of me. The story wakes up and walks all over the
room. Sits in a chair, crosses one leg over the other, says, Let me introduce
myself. Then just starts going on and on.
But as I bend over my composition notebook, only my name
comes quickly. Each letter, neatly printed between the pale blue lines. Then
white space and air and me wondering, How do I
spell introduce? Trying again and again until there is nothing but pink bits of
eraser and a hole now
where a story should be.
late autumn
Ms. Moskowitz calls us one by one and says, Come up to the board and write
your name.
When it's my turn, I walk down the aisle from my seat in the back, write
Jacqueline Woodson- the way I've done a hundred times, turn back toward
my seat, proud as anything
of my name in white letters on the dusty blackboard.
But Ms. Moskowitz stops me, says,
In cursive too, please. But the q in Jacqueline is too hard so I write Jackie
Woodson for the first time. Struggle only a little bit with the k.
Is that what you want us to call you?
I want to say, No, my name is Jacqueline
but I am scared of that cursive q, know I may never be able to connect it to c and
u
so I nod even though
I am lying.
the other woodson
Even though so many people think my sister and I are twins,
I am the other Woodson, following behind her each year into the same classroom
she had the year before. Each teacher smiles when they call my name.
Woodson, they say. You must be Odella's sister. Then they nod slowly, over
and over again, call me Odella. Say, I'm sorry! You look so much like her and
she is SO brilliant!
then wait for my brilliance to light up
the classroom. Wait for my arm to fly into the air with every answer. Wait for
my pencil to move quickly through the too-easy math problems on the
mimeographed sheet. Wait for me to stand before class, easily reading words
even high school students stumble over. And they keep waiting.
And waiting
and waiting
and waiting
until one day, they walk into the classroom, almost call me Odel-then stop
remember that I am the other Woodson
and begin searching for brilliance
at another desk.
writing #2
On the radio, Sly and the Family Stone are singing “Family Affair," the song
turned up because it's my mother's favorite, the one she plays again and
again.
You can't leave 'cause your heart is there, Sly sings.
But you can't stay 'cause you been somewhere else.
The song makes me think of Greenville and Brooklyn the two worlds my heart
lives in now. I am writing the lyrics down, trying to catch each word before
it's gone then reading them back, out loud to my mother. This is how I'm
learning. Words come slow to me on the page until
I memorize them, reading the same books over and over, copying
lyrics to songs from records and TV commercials, the words
settling into my brain, into my memory.
Not everyone learns
to read this way-memory taking over when the rest of the brain stops working,
but I do.
Sly is singing the words over and over as though
he is trying
to convince me that this whole world is just a bunch of families
like ours
going about their own family affairs.
Stop daydreaming, my mother says.
So I go back to writing down words that are songs and stories and whole new
worlds tucking themselves into
my memory.
birch tree poem
Before my teacher reads the poem, she has to explain.
A birch, she says, is a kind of tree
then magically she pulls a picture from her desk drawer and the tree is suddenly
real to us.
“When I see birches bend to left and right . . ." she begins “Across the lines of
straighter darker trees,
I like to think"-
and when she reads, her voice drops down so low and beautiful
some of us put our heads on our desks to keep the happy tears from flowing
-“some boy's been swinging them.
But swinging doesn't bend them down to stay
As ice-storms do."
And even though we've never seen an ice storm we've seen a birch tree, so we
can imagine everything we need to imagine forever and ever
infinity
amen.
how to listen #6
When I sit beneath
the shade of my block's oak tree
the world disappears.
reading
I am not my sister.
Words from the books curl around each other make little sense until
I read them again and again, the story settling into memory. Too slow
the teacher says.
Read faster.
Too babyish, the teacher says.
Read older.
But I don't want to read faster or older or any way else that might make the story
disappear too quickly from where
it's settling inside my brain, slowly becoming
a part of me.
A story I will remember long after I've read it for the second, third, tenth,
hundredth time.
stevie and me
Every Monday, my mother takes us to the library around the corner. We are
allowed to take out seven books each. On those days, no one complains
that all I want are picture books.
Those days, no one tells me to read faster to read harder books
to read like Dell.
No one is there to say, Not that book,
when I stop in front of the small paperback with a brown boy on the cover.
Stevie.
I read:
One day my momma told me,
“You know you're gonna have
a little friend come stay with you."
And I said, “Who is it?"
If someone had been fussing with me to read like my sister, I might have missed
the picture book filled with brown people, more brown people than I'd ever
seen in a book before.
The little boy's name was Steven but
his mother kept calling him Stevie.
My name is Robert but my momma don't
call me Robertie.
If someone had taken
that book out of my hand said, You're too old for this
maybe
I'd never have believed that someone who looked like me could be in the pages
of the book that someone who looked like me had a story.
when i tell my family
When I tell my family I want to be a writer, they smile and say, We see you in
the backyard with your writing.
They say,
We hear you making up all those stories.
And,
We used to write poems.
And,
It's a good hobby, we see how quiet it keeps you.
They say,
But maybe you should be a teacher,
a lawyer,
do hair . . .
I'll think about it, I say.
And maybe all of us know this is just another one of my stories.
daddy gunnar
Saturday morning and Daddy Gunnar's voice is on the other end of the phone.
We all grab for it.
Let me speak to him!
My turn!
No mine!
Until Mama makes us stand in line.
He coughs hard, takes deep breaths.
When he speaks, it's almost low as a whisper.
How are my New York grandbabies, he wants to know.
We're good, I say, holding tight to the phone but my sister is already grabbing
for it, Hope and even Roman, all of us hungry for the sound
of his faraway voice.
Y'all know how much I love you?
Infinity and back again, I say the way I've said it a million times.
And then, Daddy says to me, Go on and add
a little bit more to that.
hope onstage
Until the curtain comes up and he's standing there, ten years old and alone in the
center of the P.S. 106 stage, no one knew
my big brother could sing. He is dressed
as a shepherd, his voice soft and low, more sure than any sound I've ever
heard come out of him. My quiet big brother
who only speaks when asked, has little to say to any of us, except when he's
talking about science or comic books, now has a voice that is circling the air,
landing clear and sweet around us:
“Tingalayo, come little donkey come.
Tingalayo, come little donkey come.
My donkey walks, my donkey talks
my donkey eats with a knife and fork.
Oh Tingalayo, come little donkey come."
Hope can sing . . . my sister says in wonder
as my mother and the rest of the audience start to clap.
Maybe, I am thinking, there is something hidden like this, in all of us. A small
gift from the universe waiting to be discovered.
My big brother raises his arms, calling his donkey home.
He is smiling as he sings, the music getting louder behind him.
“Tingalayo . . ."
And in the darkened auditorium, the light is only on Hope
and it's hard to believe he has such a magic
singing voice and even harder to believe his donkey
is going to come running.
daddy this time
Greenville is different this summer, Roman is well and out back, swinging hard.
Somewhere between last summer and now, our daddy cemented the swing set
down.
Roman doesn't know the shaky days-just this moment, his dark blue Keds
pointing toward the sky,
his laughter and screams, like wind through the screen door.
Now my grandmother shushes him, Daddy resting in the bedroom, the covers
pulled up
to his chin, his thin body so much smaller than I remember it.
Just a little tired, Daddy says to me, when I tiptoe in with chicken soup,
sit on the edge of the bed and try to get him to take small sips.
He struggles into sitting, lets me feed him small mouthfuls but only a few
are enough. Too tired to eat anymore.
Then he closes his eyes.
Outside, Roman laughs again and the swing set whines with the weight of him.
Maybe Hope is there, pushing him into the air. Or maybe it's Dell.
The three of them would rather be outside.
His room smells, my sister says.
But I don't smell anything except the lotion I rub into my grandfather's hands.
When the others aren't around, he whispers, You're my favorite,
smiles and winks at me. You're going to be fine,
you know that.
Then he coughs hard and closes his eyes, his breath struggling to get
into and out of his body.
Most days, I am in here with my grandfather,
holding his hand while he sleeps
fluffing pillows and telling him stories about my friends back home.
When he asks, I speak to him in Spanish, the language that rolls off my tongue
like I was born knowing it.
Sometimes, my grandfather says, Sing me something pretty.
And when I sing to him, I'm not just left of the key or right of the tune He says I
sing beautifully.
He says I am perfect.
what everybody knows now
Even though the laws have changed
my grandmother still takes us
to the back of the bus when we go downtown in the rain. It's easier, my
grandmother says, than having white folks look at me like I'm dirt.
But we aren't dirt. We are people paying the same fare as other people.
When I say this to my grandmother, she nods, says, Easier to stay where you
belong.
I look around and see the ones
who walk straight to the back. See the ones who take a seat up front, daring
anyone to make them move. And know this is who I want to be. Not scared
like that. Brave
like that.
Still, my grandmother takes my hand downtown pulls me right past the
restaurants that have to let us sit wherever we want now. No need in making
trouble,
she says. You all go back to New York City but
I have to live here.
We walk straight past Woolworth's without even looking in the windows
because the one time my grandmother went inside they made her wait and
wait. Acted like
I wasn't even there. It's hard not to see the moment- my grandmother in her
Sunday clothes, a hat with a flower pinned to it
neatly on her head, her patent-leather purse, perfectly clasped
between her gloved hands-waiting quietly long past her turn.
end of summer
Too fast the summer leaves us, we kiss our grandparents good-bye and my uncle
Robert is there waiting
to take us home again.
When we hug our grandfather, his body is all bones and skin. But he is up now,
sitting at the window, a blanket covering his thin shoulders.
Soon, I'll get back to that garden, he says.
But most days, all I want to do
is lay down and rest.
We wave again from the taxi that pulls out slow down the drive-watch our
grandmother, still waving,
grow small behind us and our grandfather, in the window,
fade from sight.
far rockaway
Robert only stays long enough for my mother to thank him
for buying our tickets
for getting us home.
He does a fancy turn on his heel, aims two pointer fingers at us
says, I'll catch up with all of you later.
We tell him that he has to come back soon, remind him of all the stuff he's
promised us trips to Coney Island and Palisades Amusement Park,
a Crissy doll with hair that grows, a Tonka toy, Gulliver's Travels,
candy.
He says he won't forget,
asks us if he's a man of his word and everyone except my mother
nods.
Hard not to miss my mother's eyebrows, giving her baby brother a look,
pressing her lips together. Once, in the middle of the night, two policemen
knocked on our door, asking for Robert Leon Irby.
But my uncle wasn't here.
So now my mother takes a breath, says, Stay safe.
Says,
Don't get into trouble out there, Robert.
He gives her a hug, promises he won't and then he is gone.
fresh air
When I get back to Brooklyn, Maria isn't there.
She's gone upstate, staying with a family, her mother tells me, that has a pool.
Then her mother puts a plate of food in front of me, tells me how much she
knows I love her rice and chicken.
When Maria returns she is tanned and wearing a new short set. Everything about
her seems different.
I stayed with white people, she tells me. Rich white people.
The air upstate is different. It doesn't smell like anything!
She hands me a piece of bubble gum with BUBBLE YUM
in bright letters.
This is what they chew up there.
The town was called Schenectady.
All the rest of the summer Maria and I buy only
Bubble Yum, blow huge bubbles while I make her tell me story after story
about the white family in Schenectady.
They kept saying I was poor and trying to give me stuff,
Maria says. I had to keep telling them it's not poor
where we live.
Next summer, I say. You should just come down south.
It's different there.
And Maria promises she will.
On the sidewalk we draw hopscotch games that we play using chipped pieces of
slate, chalk Maria & Jackie Best Friends Forever wherever there is smooth
stone.
Write it so many times that it's hard to walk on our side
of the street without looking down
and seeing us there.
p.s. 106 haiku
Jacqueline Woodson.
I'm finally in fourth grade.
It's raining outside.
learning from langston
I loved my friend.
He went away from me.
There's nothing more to say.
The poem ends,
Soft as it began-
I loved my friend.
-Langston Hughes
I love my friend
and still do
when we play games
we laugh. I hope she never goes away from me
because I love my friend.
-Jackie Woodson
the selfish giant
In the story of the Selfish Giant, a little boy hugs a giant who has never been
hugged before.
The giant falls
in love with the boy but then one day, the boy disappears.
When he returns, he has scars on his hands and his feet, just like Jesus.
The giant dies and goes to Paradise.
The first time my teacher reads the story to the class I cry all afternoon, and am
still crying when my mother gets home from work that evening.
She doesn't understand why
I want to hear such a sad story again and again but takes me to the library around
the corner when I beg
and helps me find the book to borrow.
The Selfish Giant, by Oscar Wilde.
I read the story again and again.
Like the giant, I, too, fall in love with the Jesus boy, there's something so sweet
about him, I want to be his friend.
Then one day, my teacher asks me to come up front to read out loud. But I don't
need to bring the book with me.
The story of the Selfish Giant is in my head now, living there. Remembered.
“Every afternoon, as they were coming from school,
the children used to go and play in the Giant's garden . . ."
I tell the class, the whole story flowing out of me right up to the end when the
boy says, “These are the wounds of Love . . .
“You let me play once in your garden, today you shall
come with me to my garden, which is Paradise . . ."
How did you do that, my classmates ask.
How did you memorize all those words?
But I just shrug, not knowing what to say.
How can I explain to anyone that stories are like air to me,
I breathe them in and let them out over and over again.
Brilliant! my teacher says, smiling.
Jackie, that was absolutely beautiful.
And I know now
words are my Tingalayo. Words are my brilliance.
the butterfly poems
No one believes me when I tell them I am writing a book about butterflies, even
though they see me with the Childcraft encyclopedia heavy on my lap opened
to the pages where the monarch, painted lady, giant swallowtail and queen
butterflies live. Even one called a buckeye.
When I write the first words
Wings of a butterfly whisper . . .
no one believes a whole book could ever come from something as simple as
butterflies that don't even, my brother says, live that long.
But on paper, things can live forever.
On paper, a butterfly
never dies.
six minutes
The Sisters in the Kingdom Hall get six minutes to be onstage. In pairs. Or
threes.
But never alone.
We have to write skits
where we are visiting another Sister or maybe a nonbeliever. Sometimes
the play takes place at their pretend kitchen table and sometimes, we're in their
pretend living room but in real life we're just in folding chairs, sitting on the
Kingdom Hall stage. The first time I have to give my talk I ask if I can write
it myself without anyone helping.
There are horses and cows in my story even though the main point is supposed
to be
the story of the resurrection.
Say for instance, I write, we have a cow and a horse that we love.
Is death the end of life for those animals?
When my mother reads those lines,
she shakes her head. You're getting away from the topic,
she says. You have to take the animals out of it, get right
to the point. Start with people.
I don't know what I am supposed to do with the fabulous, more interesting part
of my story, where the horses and cows start speaking to me and to each
other. How even though they are old and won't live much longer, they aren't
afraid.
You only have six minutes, my mother says,
and no, you can't get up and walk across the stage
to make your point. Your talk has to be given
sitting down.
So I start again. Rewriting:
Good afternoon, Sister. I'm here to bring you some
good news today.
Did you know God's word is absolute? If we turn to John,
chapter five, verses twenty-eight and twenty-nine . . .
promising myself there'll come a time when I can use the rest of my story and
stand when I tell it
and give myself and my horses and my cows a whole lot more time
than six minutes!
first book
There are seven of them, haikus mostly but rhyming ones, too.
Not enough for a real book until I cut each page into a small square staple the
squares together, write one poem
on each page.
Butterflies by Jacqueline Woodson
on the front.
The butterfly book complete now.
john's bargain store
Down Knickerbocker Avenue is where everyone on the block goes to shop.
There's a pizzeria if you get hungry, seventy-five cents a slice.
There's an ice cream shop where cones cost a quarter.
There's a Fabco Shoes store and a beauty parlor.
A Woolworth's five-and-dime and a John's Bargain Store.
For a long time, I don't put one foot inside Woolworth's.
They wouldn't let Black people eat at their lunch counters
in Greenville, I tell Maria.
No way are they getting my money!
So instead, Maria and I go to John's Bargain Store where three T-shirts cost a
dollar. We buy them in pale pink, yellow and baby blue. Each night we make
a plan:
Wear your yellow one tomorrow, Maria says, and I'll wear mine.
All year long, we dress alike,
walking up and down Madison Street
waiting for someone to say, Are you guys cousins?
so we can smile, say,
Can't you tell from looking at us?!
new girl
Then one day a new girl moves in next door, tells us her name is Diana and
becomes me and Maria's Second Best Friend in the Whole World.
And even though Maria's mother knew Diana's mother in Puerto Rico, Maria
promises that doesn't make Diana más mejor
amiga-a better friend. But some days, when it's raining and Mama won't let
me go outside, I see them
on the block, their fingers laced together, heading around the corner
to the bodega for candy. Those days, the world feels as gray and cold as it really
is and it's hard
not to believe the new girl isn't más mejor than me.
Hard not to believe
my days as Maria's best friend forever and ever amen are counted.
pasteles & pernil
When Maria's brother, Carlos, gets baptized he is just a tiny baby in a white lace
gown with so many twenty-dollar bills folded into fans pinned all over it
that he looks like a green-and-white angel.
Maria and I stand over his crib
talking about all the candy we could buy with just one of those fans. But we
know that God is watching and don't even dare touch the money.
In the kitchen, there is pernil roasting in the oven the delicious smell filling the
house and Maria says, You should just eat a little bit. But I am not allowed to
eat pork. Instead, I wait for pasteles to get passed around,
wait for the ones her mother has filled with chicken for Jackie, mi ahijada, wait
for the moment when I can peel the paper
away from the crushed-plantain-covered meat, break off small pieces with my
hands and let the pastele melt in my mouth. My mother makes the best
pasteles in Brooklyn, Maria says. And even though I've only eaten her mom's, I
agree.
Whenever there is the smell of pernil and pasteles on the block, we know
there is a celebration going on. And tonight, the party is at Maria's house. The
music is loud and the cake is big and the pasteles
that her mother's been making for three days are absolutely perfect.
We take our food out to her stoop just as the grown-ups start dancing merengue,
the women lifting their long dresses to show off their fast-moving feet, the
men clapping and yelling,
Baila! Baila! until the living room floor disappears.
When I ask Maria where Diana is she says, They're coming later. This part is
just for my family.
She pulls the crisp skin
away from the pernil, eats the pork shoulder with rice and beans,
our plates balanced on our laps, tall glasses of Malta beside us.
and for a long time, neither one of us says anything.
Yeah, I say. This is only for us. The family.
curses
We are good kids,
people tell my mother this all the time, say, You have the most polite children.
I've never heard a bad word from them.
And it's true-we say please and thank you.
We speak softly. We look adults in the eyes ask, How are you? Bow our heads
when we pray.
We don't know how to curse,
when we try to put bad words together they sound strange like new babies trying
to talk and mixing up their sounds.
At home, we aren't allowed words like stupid or dumb or jerk or darn.
We aren't allowed to say
I hate or I could die or You make me sick.
We're not allowed to roll our eyes or look away when my mother is speaking to
us.
Once my brother said butt and wasn't allowed to play outside after school for a
week.
When we are with our friends and angry, we whisper, You stupid dummy
and our friends laugh then spew curses at us like bullets, bend their lips over the
words like they were born speaking them. They coach us on, tell us to Just
say it!
But we can't. Even when we try
the words get caught inside our throats, as though our mother
is standing there waiting, daring them to reach the air.
afros
When Robert comes over with his hair blown out into an afro, I beg my mother
for the same hairstyle.
Everyone in the neighborhood has one and all of the black people on Soul Train.
Even Michael Jackson and his brothers are all allowed to wear their hair this
way.
Even though she says no to me, my mom spends a lot of Saturday morning in
her bedroom mirror,
picking her own hair
into a huge black and beautiful dome.
Which
is so completely one hundred percent unfair but she says, This is the difference
between
being a grown-up and being a child. When she's not looking, I stick my tongue
out at her.
My sister catches me, says, And that's the difference
between being a child and being a grown-up,
like she's twenty years old.
Then rolls her eyes at me and goes back to reading.
graffiti
Your tag is your name written with spray paint however you want it wherever
you want it to be.
It doesn't even have to be
your real name-like Loco who lives on Woodbine Street.
His real name is Orlando but everyone calls him by his tag so
it's everywhere in Bushwick. Black and red letters and crazy eyes inside the Os.
Some kids climb to the tops of buildings, hang over the edge
spray their names upside down from there.
But me and Maria only know the ground, only know the factory on the corner
with its newly painted bright pink wall. Only know the way my heart jumps
as I press the button down, hear the hiss of paint, watch J-A-C-begin.
Only know the sound of my uncle's voice, stopping me before my name is
a part of the history-like the ones on the roofs and fire escapes and subway
cars. I wish I could explain.
Wish I had the words
to stop his anger, stop the force of him grabbing my hand, wish I knew how to
say,
Just let me write-everywhere!
But my uncle keeps asking over and over again, What's wrong with you?
Have you lost your mind?
Don't you know people get arrested
for this?
They're just words, I whisper.
They're not trying to hurt anybody!
music
Each morning the radio comes on at seven o'clock.
Sometimes Michael Jackson is singing that A-B-C
is as easy as 1-2-3
or Sly and the Family Stone are thanking us for letting them
be themselves.
Sometimes it's slower music, the Five Stairsteps telling us
things are going to get easier, or the Hollies singing, He ain't heavy, he's my
brother
So on we go . . .
My mother lets us choose what music we want to listen to
as long as the word funk doesn't appear anywhere in the song.
But the summer I am ten, funk is in every single song that comes on the cool
black radio stations. So our mother makes us listen
to the white ones.
All afternoon corny people sing about Colorado, about everything being
beautiful about how we've only just begun.
My sister falls in love
with the singers but I sneak off to Maria's house where
safe inside her room with the pink shag carpet and bunk beds,
we can comb our dolls' hair and sing along when the Ohio Players say,
He's the funkiest
Worm in the world.
We can dance
the Funky Chicken, tell imaginary intruders to get the funk out
of our faces. Say the word so hard and so loud and so many times,
it becomes something different to us-something
so silly we laugh just thinking about it.
Funky, funky, funky,
we sing again and again until the word is just a sound not connected to anything
good or bad
right or wrong.
rikers island
When the phone call comes in the middle of the night,
it isn't to tell us someone has died. It's Robert
calling from a prison called Rikers Island.
Even from my half-asleep place,
I can hear my mother taking a heavy breath, whispering, I knew this was coming,
Robert. I knew you weren't
doing right.
In the morning, we eat our cereal in silence as
our mother tells us that our uncle won't be around for a while.
When we ask where he's gone, she says, Jail.
When we ask why, she says,
It doesn't matter. We love him.
That's all we need to know and keep remembering.
Robert walked the wide road, she says. And now
he's paying for it.
Witnesses believe there's a wide road and a narrow road.
To be good in the eyes of God is to walk the narrow one, live a good clean life,
pray, do what's right.
On the wide road, there is every kind of bad thing anyone can imagine. I imagine
my uncle doing his smooth dance steps down the wide road,
smiling as the music plays loud. I imagine him laughing, pressing quarters into
our palms, pulling presents for us from his bag, thick gold bracelet flashing at
his wrist.
Where'd you get this? my mother asked, her face tight.
It doesn't matter, my uncle answered. Y'all know I love you.
You doing the right thing, Robert? my mother wanted to know. Yes, my uncle
said. I promise you.
It rains all day. We sit around the house waiting for the sun to come out so we
can go outside.
Dell reads in the corner of our room. I pull out my beat-up composition
notebook
try to write another butterfly poem.
Nothing comes.
The page looks like the day-wrinkled and empty no longer promising anyone
anything.
moving upstate
From Rikers Island, my uncle is sent to a prison upstate we can visit.
We don't know what he'll look like, how much he'll have changed. And because
our mother warns us not to, I don't tell anyone he's in jail.
When my friends ask, I say, He moved upstate.
We're going to visit him soon.
He lives in a big house, I say. With a big yard and everything.
But the missing settles inside of me. Every time James Brown comes on the
radio, I see Robert dancing.
Every time the commercial for the Crissy doll comes on I think how I almost got
one.
He's my favorite uncle, I say one afternoon.
He's our ONLY uncle, my sister says.
Then goes back to reading.
on the bus to dannemora
We board the bus when the sun is just kissing the sky.
Darkness like a cape that we wear for hours, curled into it and back to sleep.
From somewhere above us
the O'Jays are singing, telling people all over the world to join hands and start a
love train.
The song rocks me gently into and out of dreaming and in the dream, a train
filled with love goes on and on.
And in the story that begins from the song, the bus is no longer a bus and we're
no longer going to Dannemora. But there is food and laughter and the music.
The girl telling the story is me but not me at the same time-watching all of
this, writing it down as fast as she can,
singing along with the O'Jays, asking everyone to let this train keep on
riding . . .
“riding on through . . ."
and it's the story of a whole train filled with love and how the people on it
aren't in prison but are free to dance
and sing and hug their families whenever they want.
On the bus, some of the people are sleeping, others are staring out the window or
talking softly.
Even the children are quiet. Maybe each of them
is thinking their own dream-of daddies and uncles, brothers
and cousins one day being free to come on board.
Please don't miss this train at the station
‘Cause if you miss it, I feel sorry, sorry for you.
too good
The bus moves slow out of the city until we can see the mountains, and above
that, so much blue sky.
Passing the mountains.
Passing the sea
Passing the heavens.
That's soon where I will be . . .
A song comes to me quickly, the words moving through my brain and out of my
mouth in a whisper but still my sister hears, asks who taught it to me.
I just made it up, I say.
No you didn't, she says back. It's too good. Someone
taught that to you.
I don't say anything back. Just look out the window and smile.
Too good, I am thinking. The stuff I make up is too good.
dannemora
At the gate of the prison, guards glare at us, then slowly allow us in.
My big brother is afraid.
He looks up at the barbed wire
puts his hands in his pockets.
I know he wishes he was home with his chemistry set.
I know he wants to be anywhere but here.
Nothing but stone and a big building that goes so far up and so far back and forth
that we can't see where the beginning is
or where it might end. Gray brick, small windows covered with wire. Who could
see out from here? The guards check our pockets, check our bags, make us
walk through X-ray machines.
My big brother holds out his arms. Lets the guards pat him from shoulder to
ankle, checking for anything he might be hiding . . .
He is Hope Austin Woodson the Second, part of a long line of Woodsons-
doctors and lawyers and teachers- but as quickly as THAT! he can become
a number. Like Robert Leon Irby is now so many numbers across the pocket
of his prison uniform that it's hard not to keep looking at them,
waiting for them to morph into letters that spell out
my uncle's name.
not robert
When the guard brings our uncle to the waiting room that is filled with other
families waiting, he is not
Robert. His afro is gone now, shaved to a black shadow on his perfect skull.
His eyebrows are thicker than I remember, dipping down in a newer, sadder
way. Even when he smiles, opens his arms
to hug all of us at once, the bit I catch of it, before jumping into his hug, is a half
smile, caught and trapped inside a newer, sadder uncle.
mountain song
On the way home from visiting Robert, I watch the mountains move past me and
slowly the mountain song starts coming again more words this time, coming
faster than I can sing them.
Passing the mountains
Passing the sea
Passing the heavens
waiting for me.
Look at the mountains
Such a beautiful sea
And there's a promise that heaven
is filled with glory.
I sing the song over and over again, quietly into the windowpane, my forehead
pressed against the cool glass. Tears coming fast now.
The song makes me think of Robert and Daddy
and Greenville and everything that feels far behind me now, everything that is
going
or already gone.
I am thinking if I can hold on to the memory of this song get home and write it
down, then it will happen, I'll be a writer. I'll be able to hold on to each
moment, each memory
everything.
poem on paper
When anyone in the family asks what I'm writing, I usually say, Nothing
or
A story
or
A poem
and only my mother says, Just so long as you're not writing about our family.
And I'm not.
Well, not really . . .
Up in the mountains
far from the sea
there's a place called Dannemora
the men are not free . . .
daddy
It is early spring
when my grandmother sends for us.
Warm enough to believe again
that food will come from the newly thawed earth.
This is the weather, my mother says, Daddy loved
to garden in. We arrive
not long before my grandfather is about to take his last breaths,
breathless ourselves from our first ride in an airplane.
I want to tell him all about it
how loud it was when the plane lifted into the sky, each of us, leaning toward the
window, watching New York
grow small and speckled beneath us.
How the meals arrived
on tiny trays-some kind of fish that none of us ate.
I want to tell him how the stewardess gave us wings to pin to our blouses and
shirts and told Mama we were beautiful and well behaved. But my
grandfather is sleeping when we come to his bedside, opens his eyes only to
smile, turns so that my grandmother can press ice cubes against his lips. She
tells us, He needs his rest now. That evening he dies.
On the day he is buried, my sister and I wear white dresses, the boys in white
shirts and ties.
We walk slowly through Nicholtown, a long parade
of people who loved him-Hope, Dell, Roman and me leading it. This is how
we bury our dead-a silent parade through the streets, showing the world our
sadness, others who knew my grandfather joining in on the walk, children
waving,
grown-ups dabbing at their eyes.
Ashes to ashes, we say at the grave site with each handful of dirt we drop gently
onto his
lowering casket.
We will see you in the by and by, we say.
We will see you in the by and by.
how to listen #7
Even the silence
has a story to tell you.
Just listen. Listen.

after greenville #2
After Daddy dies
my grandmother sells the house in Nicholtown gives the brown chair to Miss
Bell, Daddy's clothes to the Brothers at the Kingdom Hall, the kitchen table
and bright yellow chairs to her sister Lucinda in Fieldcrest Village.
After Daddy dies
my grandmother brings the bed our mother was born in to Brooklyn. Unpacks
her dresses in the small empty bedroom
downstairs,
puts her Bible, Watchtowers and Awakes, a picture of Daddy
on the little brown bookshelf.
After Daddy dies
spring blurs into summer
then winter comes on too cold and fast, and my grandmother moves a chair to
the living room window
watches the tree drop the last of its leaves while boys play skelly and spinning
tops in the middle of our quiet Brooklyn street.
After Daddy dies
I learn to jump double Dutch slowly tripping again and again over my too-big
feet. Counting, Ten, twenty, thirty, forty deep into the winter until one
afternoon
gravity releases me and my feet fly free in the ropes, fifty, sixty, seventy, eighty,
ninety . . .
as my grandmother watches me.
Both of our worlds
changed forever.
mimosa tree
A mimosa tree, green and thin limbed, pushes up through the snow. My
grandmother brought the seeds with her
from back home.
Sometimes, she pulls a chair to the window, looks
down over the yard.
The promise of glittering sidewalks feels a long time
behind us now, no diamonds anywhere to be found.
But some days, just after snow falls, the sun comes out, shines down on the
promise of that tree from back home joining us here.
Shines down over the bright white ground.
And on those days, so much light and warmth fills the room that it's hard not to
believe in a little bit
of everything.
bubble-gum cigarettes
You can buy a box of bubble-gum cigarettes for a dime at the bodega around the
corner.
Sometimes, Maria and I walk there, our fingers laced together, a nickel in each
of our pockets.
The bubble gum is pink with white paper wrapped around it. When you put it in
your mouth and blow, a white puff comes out.
You can really believe you're smoking.
We talk with the bubble-gum cigarettes between our fingers. Hold them in the
air like the movie stars on TV. We let them dangle from our mouths and look
at each other through slitted eyes
then laugh at how grown-up we can be how beautiful.
When my sister sees us pretending to smoke, she shakes her head.
That's why Daddy died, she says.
After that
me and Maria peel the paper off, turn our cigarettes into regular bubble gum.
After that
the game is over.
what's left behind
You've got your daddy's easy way,
my grandmother says to me, holding
the picture of my grandfather
in her hands. I watch you with
your friends and see him all over again.
Where will the wedding supper be?
Way down yonder in a hollow tree . . .
We look at the picture without talking.
Sometimes, I don't know the words for things, how to write down the feeling of
knowing that every dying person leaves something behind.
I got my grandfather's easy way. Maybe I know this when I'm laughing. Maybe
I know it when I think of Daddy
and he feels close enough
for me to lay my head against his shoulder.
I remember how he laughed, I tell my grandmother and she smiles and says,
Because you laugh just like him.
Two peas in a pod, you were.
Two peas in a pod we were.
the stories i tell
Every autumn, the teacher asks us to write about summer vacation
and read it to the class.
In Brooklyn, everybody goes south or to Puerto Rico
or to their cousin's house in Queens.
But after my grandmother moves to New York, we only go down south once,
for my aunt Lucinda's funeral. After that, my grandmother says she's done with
the South says it makes her too sad.
But now
when summer comes
our family gets on a plane, flies to
Africa
Hawaii
Chicago.
For summer vacation we went to Long Island,
to the beach. Everybody went fishing and everybody
caught a lot of fish.
Even though no one in my family has ever been to Long Island
or fished
or likes the ocean-too deep, too scary. Still, each autumn, I write a story.
In my writing, there is a stepfather now who lives in California but meets us
wherever we go.
There is a church, not a Kingdom Hall.
There is a blue car, a new dress, loose unribboned hair.
In my stories, our family is regular as air two boys, two girls, sometimes a dog.
Did that really happen? the kids in class ask.
Yeah, I say. If it didn't, how would I know what to write?
how to listen #8
Do you remember . . . ?
someone's always asking and
someone else, always does.
fate & faith & reasons
Everything happens for a reason, my mother says. Then tells me how Kay
believed in fate and destiny-everything
that ever happened or was going to happen couldn't ever be avoided. The
marchers down south didn't just up and start their marching-it was part of a
longer, bigger plan, that maybe belonged to God.
My mother tells me this as we fold laundry, white towels separated from the
colored ones. Each a threat to the other and I remember the time I spilled
bleach on a blue towel, dotting it forever.
The pale pink towel, a memory
of when it was washed with a red one. Maybe there is something, after all, to the
way some people want to remain-each to its own kind.
But in time
maybe
everything will fade to gray.
Even all of us coming to Brooklyn,
my mother says, wasn't some accident. And I can't help thinking of the birds
here-how they disappear in the wintertime,
heading south for food and warmth and shelter.
Heading south
to stay alive . . . passing us on the way . . .
No accidents, my mother says. Just fate and faith
and reasons.
When I ask my mother what she believes in, she stops, midfold, and looks out
the back window.
Autumn
is full on here and the sky is bright blue.
I guess I believe in right now, she says. And the resurrection.
And Brooklyn. And the four of you.
what if . . . ?
Maria's mother never left Bayamón, Puerto Rico, and my mother never left
Greenville.
What if no one had ever walked the grassy fields that are now Madison Street
and said, Let's put some houses here.
What if the people in Maria's building didn't sell 1279 Madison Street
to Maria's parents
and our landlord told my mom that he couldn't rent 1283
to someone who already had four children.
What if the park with the swings wasn't right across Knickerbocker Avenue?
What if Maria hadn't walked out of her building one day and said,
My name is Maria but my mom calls me Googoo.
What if I had laughed instead of saying, You're lucky. I wish I had a nickname,
too.
You want to go to the park sometime?
What if she didn't have a sister and two brothers and I didn't have a sister and
two brothers and her dad didn't teach us to box
and her mother didn't cook such good food?
I can't even imagine any of it, Maria says.
Nope, I say. Neither can I.
bushwick history lesson
Before German mothers wrapped scarves around
their heads, kissed their own mothers good-bye and headed across
the world to Bushwick- Before the Italian fathers sailed across the ocean for
the dream of America
and found themselves in Bushwick- Before Dominican daughters donned
quinceañera
dresses and walked proudly down Bushwick Avenue- Before young brown
boys in cutoff shorts spun their
first tops and played their first games of skelly on
Bushwick Streets- Before any of that, this place was called Boswijck,
settled by the Dutch
and Franciscus the Negro, a former slave who bought his freedom.
And all of New York was called New Amsterdam,
run by a man named Peter Stuyvesant. There were slaves here.
Those who could afford to own their freedom
lived on the other side of the wall.
And now that place is called Wall Street.
When my teacher says, So write down what all of this means
to you, our heads bend over our notebooks, the whole class silent. The whole
class belonging somewhere: Bushwick.
I didn't just appear one day.
I didn't just wake up and know how to write my name.
I keep writing, knowing now that I was a long time coming.
how to listen #9
Under the back porch
there's an alone place I go
writing all I've heard.
the promise land
When my uncle gets out of jail he isn't just my uncle anymore, he is Robert the
Muslim and wears a small black kufi on his head.
And even though we know we Witnesses are the chosen ones, we listen to the
stories he tells about a man named Muhammad
and a holy place called Mecca and the strength of all Black people.
We sit in a circle around him, his hands moving slow through the air, his voice
calmer and quieter than it was before he went away.
When he pulls out a small rug to pray on I kneel beside him, wanting to see his
Mecca
wanting to know the place he calls the Promise Land.
Look with your heart and your head, he tells me his own head bowed.
It's out there in front of you.
You'll know when you get there.
power to the people
On the TV screen a woman
named Angela Davis is telling us there's a revolution going on and that it's time
for Black people to defend themselves.
So Maria and I walk through the streets, our fists raised in the air Angela Davis
style.
We read about her in the Daily News, run to the television each time she's
interviewed.
She is beautiful and powerful and has my same gap-toothed smile. We dream of
running away to California to join the Black Panthers the organization Angela
is a part of.
She is not afraid, she says, to die for what she believes in but doesn't plan to die
without a fight.
The FBI says Angela Davis is one of America's Most Wanted.
Already, there are so many things I don't understand, why someone would have
to die or even fight for what they believe in.
Why the cops would want someone who is trying to change the world
in jail.
We are not afraid to die, Maria and I shout, fists high,
for what we believe in.
But both of us know-we'd rather keep believing and live.
say it loud
My mother tells us the Black Panthers are doing all kinds of stuff
to make the world a better place for Black children.
In Oakland, they started a free breakfast program so that poor kids can have a
meal before starting their school day. Pancakes, toast, eggs, fruit: we watch
the kids eat happily, sing songs about how proud they are to be Black. We
sing the song along with them stand on the bases of lampposts and scream,
Say it loud: I'm Black and I'm proud until my mother hollers from the
window, Get down before you break your neck.
I don't understand the revolution.
In Bushwick, there's a street we can't cross called Wyckoff Avenue. White
people live on the other side.
Once a boy from my block got beat up for walking over there.
Once there were four white families on our block but they all moved away
except for the old lady who lives by the tree. Some days, she brings out
cookies tells us stories of the old neighborhood when everyone was German
or Irish and even some Italians down by Wilson Avenue.
All kinds of people, she says. And the cookies are too good for me to say,
Except us.
Everyone knows where they belong here.
It's not Greenville
but it's not diamond sidewalks either.
I still don't know what it is
that would make people want to get along.
Maybe no one does.
Angela Davis smiles, gap-toothed and beautiful,
raises her fist in the air says, Power to the people, looks out from the
television directly into my eyes.
maybe mecca
There is a teenager on our block with one arm missing, we call him Leftie and
he tells us he lost his arm in Vietnam.
That's a war, he says. Y'all lucky to be too young to go.
It doesn't hurt anymore, he tells us when we gather around him.
But his eyes are sad eyes and some days he walks around the block
maybe a hundred times without saying anything to anyone.
When we call, Hey Leftie! he doesn't even look our way.
Some evenings, I kneel toward Mecca with my uncle.
Maybe Mecca
is the place Leftie goes to in his mind, when the memory of losing
his arm becomes too much. Maybe Mecca is good memories,
presents and stories and poetry and arroz con pollo
and family and friends . . .
Maybe Mecca is the place everyone is looking for . . .
It's out there in front of you, my uncle says.
I know I'll know it
when I get there.
the revolution
Don't wait for your school to teach you, my uncle says, about the revolution. It's
happening in the streets.
He's been out of jail for more than a year now and his hair is an afro again,
gently moving in the wind as we head to the park, him holding tight
to my hand even when we're not crossing Knickerbocker Avenue, even now
when I'm too old for hand holding and the like.
The revolution is when Shirley Chisholm ran for president and the rest of the
world tried to imagine a Black woman in the White House.
When I hear the word
revolution
I think of the carousel with
all those beautiful horses
going around as though they'll never stop and me choosing the purple one each
time, climbing up onto it and reaching for the golden ring, as soft music
plays.
The revolution is always going to be happening.
I want to write this down, that the revolution is like a merry-go-round, history
always being made somewhere. And maybe for a short time, we're a part of
that history. And then the ride stops and our turn is over.
We walk slow toward the park where I can already see the big swings, empty
and waiting for me.
And after I write it down, maybe I'll end it this way: My name is Jacqueline
Woodson
and I am ready for the ride.
how to listen #10
Write down what I think
I know. The knowing will come.
Just keep listening . . .
a writer
You're a writer, Ms. Vivo says, her gray eyes bright behind
thin wire frames. Her smile bigger than anything so I smile back, happy to hear
these words from a teacher's mouth. She is a feminist, she tells us and thirty
fifth-grade hands bend into desks where our dictionaries wait to open yet
another world to us. Ms. Vivo pauses, watches our fingers fly Webster's has
our answers.
Equal rights, a boy named Andrew yells out.
For women.
My hands freeze on the thin white pages.
Like Blacks, Ms. Vivo, too, is part of a revolution.
But right now, that revolution is so far away from me.
This moment, this here, this right now is my teacher
saying, You're a writer, as she holds the poem I am just beginning.
The first four lines, stolen
from my sister:
Black brothers, Black sisters, all of them were great
no fear no fright but a willingness to fight . . .
You can have them, Dell said when she saw.
I don't want to be a poet.
And then my own pencil moving late into the evening: In big fine houses lived
the whites
in little old shacks lived the blacks
but the blacks were smart
in fear they took no part.
One of them was Martin
with a heart of gold.
You're a writer, Ms. Vivo says, holding my poem out to me.
And standing in front of the class taking my poem from her
my voice shakes as I recite the first line: Black brothers, Black sisters, all of
them were great. . . .
But my voice grows stronger with each word because more than anything else in
the world, I want to believe her.
every wish, one dream
Every dandelion blown each Star light, star bright,
The first star I see tonight.
My wish is always the same.
Every fallen eyelash and first firefly of summer . . .
The dream remains.
What did you wish for?
To be a writer.
Every heads-up penny found and daydream and night dream and even when
people say it's a pipe dream . . . !
I want to be a writer.
Every sunrise and sunset and song against a cold windowpane.
Passing the mountains.
Passing the sea.
Every story read
every poem remembered: I loved my friend
and
When I see birches bend to left and right
and
“Nay," answered the child: “but these are the wounds of Love."
Every memory . . .
Froggie went a-courting, and he did ride
Uh hmm.
brings me closer
and closer to the dream.
the earth from far away
Every Saturday morning, we run downstairs to the television. Just as the theme
song from The Big Blue Marble begins, the four of us sing along: The earth's
a big blue marble when you see it from out there.
Then the camera is zooming in on that marble,
the blue becoming water, then land, then children in Africa and Texas
and China and Spain and sometimes, New York City! The world close
enough to touch now and children from all over right in our living room!
Telling us their stories.
The sun and moon declare, our beauty's very rare . . .
The world-my world!-like words. Once there was only the letter J and my
sister's hand wrapped around mine, guiding me, promising me infinity. This
big blue marble
of world and words and people and places inside my head and
somewhere out there, too.
All of it, mine now if I just listen
and write it down.
what i believe
I believe in God and evolution.
I believe in the Bible and the Qur'an.
I believe in Christmas and the New World.
I believe that there is good in each of us no matter who we are or what we
believe in.
I believe in the words of my grandfather.
I believe in the city and the South
the past and the present.
I believe in Black people and White people coming
together.
I believe in nonviolence and “Power to the People."
I believe in my little brother's pale skin and my own
dark brown.
I believe in my sister's brilliance and the too-easy
books I love to read.
I believe in my mother on a bus and Black people
refusing to ride.
I believe in good friends and good food.
I believe in johnny pumps and jump ropes, Malcolm and Martin, Buckeyes and
Birmingham, writing and listening, bad words and good words- I believe in
Brooklyn!
I believe in one day and someday and this
perfect moment called Now.
each world
When there are many worlds you can choose the one you walk into each day.
You can imagine yourself brilliant as your sister, slower moving, quiet and
thoughtful as your older brother or filled up with the hiccupping joy and
laughter of the baby in the family.
You can imagine yourself a mother now, climbing onto a bus at nightfall,
turning to wave good-bye to your children, watching the world of South
Carolina disappear behind you.
When there are many worlds, love can wrap itself around you, say, Don't cry.
Say, You are as good as anyone.
Say, Keep remembering me. And you know, even as the
world explodes around you-that you are loved . . .
Each day a new world opens itself up to you. And all the worlds you are- Ohio
and Greenville
Woodson and Irby
Gunnar's child and Jack's daughter Jehovah's Witness and nonbeliever listener
and writer
Jackie and Jacqueline- gather into one world called You
where You decide
what each world
and each story
and each ending
will finally be.
author's note
Memory is strange. When I first began to write Brown Girl Dreaming, my
childhood memories of Greenville came flooding back to me-small moments
and bigger ones, too. Things I hadn't thought about in years and other stuff I've
never forgotten. When I began to write it all down, I realized how much I missed
the South. So for the first time in many years, I returned “home," and saw
cousins I hadn't seen since I was small, heard stories I had heard many times
from my grandmother, walked roads that were very different now but still the
same roads of my childhood. It was a bittersweet journey. I wish I could have
walked those roads again with my mom, my grandfather, my uncle Robert, my
aunt Kay, and my grandmother. But all have made their own journey to the next
place. So I walked the roads alone this time. Still, it felt as though each of them
was with me-they're all deeply etched now, into memory.
And that's what this book is-my past, my people, my memories, my story.
I knew I couldn't write about the South without writing about Ohio. And
even though I was only a baby when we lived there, I have the gift of my
amazing aunt Ada Adams, who is a genealogist and our family historian. She
was my go-to person and filled in so many gaps in my memory. Aunt Ada took
me right back to Columbus. During the writing of this book, I returned to Ohio
with my family. Aunt Ada took us on a journey of the Underground Railroad,
showed us the graves of grandparents and great-grandparents, told me so much
history I had missed out on as a child. Aunt Ada not only showed me the past but
she also helped me understand the present. So often, I am asked where my
stories come from. I know now my stories are part of a continuum-my aunt is a
storyteller. So were my mom and my grandmother. And the history Aunt Ada
showed me-the rich history that is my history-made me at once proud and
thoughtful. The people who came before me worked so hard to make this world
a better place for me. I know my work is to make the world a better place for
those coming after. As long as I can remember this, I can continue to do the
work I was put here to do.
On the journey to writing this book, my dad, Jack Woodson, chimed in when
he could. Even as I write this, I smile because my father always makes me laugh.
I like to think I acquired a bit of his sense of humor. I didn't know him for many
years. When I met him again at the age of fourteen, it was as though a puzzle
piece had dropped from the air and landed right where it belonged. My dad is
that puzzle piece.
Gaps were also filled in by my friend Maria, who helped the journey along
with pictures and stories. When we were little, we used to say we'd one day be
old ladies together, sitting in rocking chairs remembering our childhood and
laughing. We've been friends for nearly five decades now and still call each
other My Forever Friend. I hope everyone has a Forever Friend in their life.
But at the end of the day, I was alone with Brown Girl Dreaming-walking
through these memories and making sense out of myself as a writer in a way I
had never done before.
I am often asked if I had a hard life growing up. I think my life was very
complicated and very rich. Looking back on it, I think my life was at once
ordinary and amazing. I couldn't imagine any other life. I know that I was lucky
enough to be born during a time when the world was changing like crazy-and
that I was a part of that change. I know that I was and continue to be loved.
I couldn't ask for anything more.
thankfuls
I am thankful for my memory. When it needed help on the journey, I am also
thankful for my fabulous editor, Nancy Paulsen. More help came from Sara
LaFleur. This book wouldn't be in the world without my family, including Hope,
Odella, and Roman, Toshi, Jackson-Leroi, and Juliet-thank you for your
patience and thorough reading and rereading. Thanks to my forever friend,
Maria Cortez-Ocasio, her husband, Sam, and her daughters Jillian, Samantha,
and Angelina. Even her grandson, Little Sammy. And of course, her mom,
Darma-thanks for feeding me so well over the years.
Toshi Reagon, thanks for reading this and sitting with me as I fretted over it.
Thanks for your music, your guidance, your stories.
On the Ohio side: a big big thank-you to my aunt Ada-genealogist
extraordinaire!-and to my aunt Alicia and my uncle David and, of course, my
dad, Jack Woodson.
On the Greenville side: big thanks to my cousins Michael and Sheryl Irby,
Megan Irby, Michael and Kenneth Sullivan, Dorothy Vaughn-Welch, Samuel
Miller, La'Brandon, Monica Vaughn, and all my other relatives who opened
their doors, let me in, told me their stories!
In North Carolina, thanks so much to Stephanie Grant, Ara Wilson, Augusta,
and Josephine for that fabulously quiet guest room and dinner at the end of the
day for many days until this book was close to being in the world.
On the Brooklyn and Vermont sides: thanks to my village. So grateful for all
of you!
In memory: thanks to my mom, Mary Anne Woodson, my uncles Odell and
Robert Irby, my grandmother Georgiana Scott Irby, my grandfather Gunnar Irby,
and my aunt Hallique Caroline (Kay) Irby.
These thankfuls wouldn't be complete without acknowledging the myriad
teachers who, in many different ways, pointed this brown girl toward her dream.




